the alchemist high up, crowning the grassy summit of a swelling mount whose sides are wooded near the base with the gnarled trees of the primeval forest stands the old chateau of my ancestors. for centuries its lofty battlements have frowned down upon the wild and rugged countryside about, serving as a home and stronghold for the proud house whose honored line is older even than the mossgrown castle walls. these ancient turrets, stained by the storms of generations and crumbling under the slow yet mighty pressure of time, formed in the ages of feudalism one of the most dreaded and formidable fortresses in all france. from its machicolated parapets and mounted battlements barons, counts, and even kings had been defied, yet never had its spacious halls resounded to the footsteps of the invader. but since those glorious years, all is changed. a poverty but little above the level of dire want, together with a pride of name that forbids its alleviation by the pursuits of commercial life, have prevented the scions of our line from maintaining their estates in pristine splendour; and the falling stones of the walls, the overgrown vegetation in the parks, the dry and dusty moat, the illpaved courtyards, and toppling towers without, as well as the sagging floors, the wormeaten wainscots, and the faded tapestries within, all tell a gloomy tale of fallen grandeur. as the ages passed, first one, then another of the four great turrets were left to ruin, until at last but a single tower housed the sadly reduced descendants of the once mighty lords of the estate. it was in one of the vast and gloomy chambers of this remaining tower that i, antoine, last of the unhappy and accursed counts de c, first saw the light of day, ninety long years ago. within these walls and amongst the dark and shadowy forests, the wild ravines and grottos of the hillside below, were spent the first years of my troubled life. my parents i never knew. my father had been killed at the age of thirtytwo, a month before i was born, by the fall of a stone somehow dislodged from one of the deserted parapets of the castle. and my mother having died at my birth, my care and education devolved solely upon one remaining servitor, an old and trusted man of considerable intelligence, whose name i remember as pierre. i was an only child and the lack of companionship which this fact entailed upon me was augmented by the strange care exercised by my aged guardian, in excluding me from the society of the peasant children whose abodes were scattered here and there upon the plains that surround the base of the hill. at that time, pierre said that this restriction was imposed upon me because my noble birth placed me above association with such plebeian company. now i know that its real object was to keep from my ears the idle tales of the dread curse upon our line that were nightly told and magnified by the simple tenantry as they conversed in hushed accents in the glow of their cottage hearths. thus isolated, and thrown upon my own resources, i spent the hours of my childhood in poring over the ancient tomes that filled the shadow haunted library of the chateau, and in roaming without aim or purpose through the perpetual dust of the spectral wood that clothes the side of the hill near its foot. it was perhaps an effect of such surroundings that my mind early acquired a shade of melancholy. those studies and pursuits which partake of the dark and occult in nature most strongly claimed my attention. of my own race i was permitted to learn singularly little, yet what small knowledge of it i was able to gain seemed to depress me much. perhaps it was at first only the manifest reluctance of my old preceptor to discuss with me my paternal ancestry that gave rise to the terror which i ever felt at the mention of my great house, yet as i grew out of childhood, i was able to piece together disconnected fragments of discourse, let slip from the unwilling tongue which had begun to falter in approaching senility, that had a sort of relation to a certain circumstance which i had always deemed strange, but which now became dimly terrible. the circumstance to which i allude is the early age at which all the counts of my line had met their end. whilst i had hitherto considered this but a natural attribute of a family of shortlived men, i afterward pondered long upon these premature deaths, and began to connect them with the wanderings of the old man, who often spoke of a curse which for centuries had prevented the lives of the holders of my title from much exceeding the span of thirtytwo years. upon my twentyfirst birthday, the aged pierre gave to me a family document which he said had for many generations been handed down from father to son, and continued by each possessor. its contents were of the most startling nature, and its perusal confirmed the gravest of my apprehensions. at this time, my belief in the supernatural was firm and deepseated, else i should have dismissed with scorn the incredible narrative unfolded before my eyes. the paper carried me back to the days of the thirteenth century, when the old castle in which i sat had been a feared and impregnable fortress. it told of a certain ancient man who had once dwelled on our estates, a person of no small accomplishments, though little above the rank of peasant, by name, michel, usually designated by the surname of mauvais, the evil, on account of his sinister reputation. he had studied beyond the custom of his kind, seeking such things as the philosophers stone or the elixir of eternal life, and was reputed wise in the terrible secrets of black magic and alchemy. michel mauvais had one son, named charles, a youth as proficient as himself in the hidden arts, who had therefore been called le sorcier, or the wizard. this pair, shunned by all honest folk, were suspected of the most hideous practices. old michel was said to have burnt his wife alive as a sacrifice to the devil, and the unaccountable disappearance of many small peasant children was laid at the dreaded door of these two. yet through the dark natures of the father and son ran one redeeming ray of humanity; the evil old man loved his offspring with fierce intensity, whilst the youth had for his parent a more than filial affection. one night the castle on the hill was thrown into the wildest confusion by the vanishment of young godfrey, son to henri, the count. a searching party, headed by the frantic father, invaded the cottage of the sorcerers and there came upon old michel mauvais, busy over a huge and violently boiling cauldron. without certain cause, in the ungoverned madness of fury and despair, the count laid hands on the aged wizard, and ere he released his murderous hold, his victim was no more. meanwhile, joyful servants were proclaiming the finding of young godfrey in a distant and unused chamber of the great edifice, telling too late that poor michel had been killed in vain. as the count and his associates turned away from the lowly abode of the alchemist, the form of charles le sorcier appeared through the trees. the excited chatter of the menials standing about told him what had occurred, yet he seemed at first unmoved at his fathers fate. then, slowly advancing to meet the count, he pronounced in dull yet terrible accents the curse that ever afterward haunted the house of c. may neer a noble of thy murdrous line survive to reach a greater age than thine! spake he, when, suddenly leaping backwards into the black woods, he drew from his tunic a phial of colourless liquid which he threw into the face of his fathers slayer as he disappeared behind the inky curtain of the night. the count died without utterance, and was buried the next day, but little more than two and thirty years from the hour of his birth. no trace of the assassin could be found, though relentless bands of peasants scoured the neighboring woods and the meadowland around the hill. thus time and the want of a reminder dulled the memory of the curse in the minds of the late counts family, so that when godfrey, innocent cause of the whole tragedy and now bearing the title, was killed by an arrow whilst hunting at the age of thirtytwo, there were no thoughts save those of grief at his demise. but when, years afterward, the next young count, robert by name, was found dead in a nearby field of no apparent cause, the peasants told in whispers that their seigneur had but lately passed his thirtysecond birthday when surprised by early death. louis, son to robert, was found drowned in the moat at the same fateful age, and thus down through the centuries ran the ominous chronicle: henris, roberts, antoines, and armands snatched from happy and virtuous lives when little below the age of their unfortunate ancestor at his murder. that i had left at most but eleven years of further existence was made certain to me by the words which i had read. my life, previously held at small value, now became dearer to me each day, as i delved deeper and deeper into the mysteries of the hidden world of black magic. isolated as i was, modern science had produced no impression upon me, and i laboured as in the middle ages, as wrapt as had been old michel and young charles themselves in the acquisition of demonological and alchemical learning. yet read as i might, in no manner could i account for the strange curse upon my line. in unusually rational moments i would even go so far as to seek a natural explanation, attributing the early deaths of my ancestors to the sinister charles le sorcier and his heirs; yet, having found upon careful inquiry that there were no known descendants of the alchemist, i would fall back to occult studies, and once more endeavor to find a spell, that would release my house from its terrible burden. upon one thing i was absolutely resolved. i should never wed, for, since no other branch of my family was in existence, i might thus end the curse with myself. as i drew near the age of thirty, old pierre was called to the land beyond. alone i buried him beneath the stones of the courtyard about which he had loved to wander in life. thus was i left to ponder on myself as the only human creature within the great fortress, and in my utter solitude my mind began to cease its vain protest against the impending doom, to become almost reconciled to the fate which so many of my ancestors had met. much of my time was now occupied in the exploration of the ruined and abandoned halls and towers of the old chateau, which in youth fear had caused me to shun, and some of which old pierre had once told me had not been trodden by human foot for over four centuries. strange and awesome were many of the objects i encountered. furniture, covered by the dust of ages and crumbling with the rot of long dampness, met my eyes. cobwebs in a profusion never before seen by me were spun everywhere, and huge bats flapped their bony and uncanny wings on all sides of the otherwise untenanted gloom. of my exact age, even down to days and hours, i kept a most careful record, for each movement of the pendulum of the massive clock in the library told off so much of my doomed existence. at length i approached that time which i had so long viewed with apprehension. since most of my ancestors had been seized some little while before they reached the exact age of count henri at his end, i was every moment on the watch for the coming of the unknown death. in what strange form the curse should overtake me, i knew not; but i was resolved at least that it should not find me a cowardly or a passive victim. with new vigour i applied myself to my examination of the old chateau and its contents. it was upon one of the longest of all my excursions of discovery in the deserted portion of the castle, less than a week before that fatal hour which i felt must mark the utmost limit of my stay on earth, beyond which i could have not even the slightest hope of continuing to draw breath that i came upon the culminating event of my whole life. i had spent the better part of the morning in climbing up and down half ruined staircases in one of the most dilapidated of the ancient turrets. as the afternoon progressed, i sought the lower levels, descending into what appeared to be either a mediaeval place of confinement, or a more recently excavated storehouse for gunpowder. as i slowly traversed the nitreencrusted passageway at the foot of the last staircase, the paving became very damp, and soon i saw by the light of my flickering torch that a blank, waterstained wall impeded my journey. turning to retrace my steps, my eye fell upon a small trapdoor with a ring, which lay directly beneath my foot. pausing, i succeeded with difficulty in raising it, whereupon there was revealed a black aperture, exhaling noxious fumes which caused my torch to sputter, and disclosing in the unsteady glare the top of a flight of stone steps. as soon as the torch which i lowered into the repellent depths burned freely and steadily, i commenced my descent. the steps were many, and led to a narrow stoneflagged passage which i knew must be far underground. this passage proved of great length, and terminated in a massive oaken door, dripping with the moisture of the place, and stoutly resisting all my attempts to open it. ceasing after a time my efforts in this direction, i had proceeded back some distance toward the steps when there suddenly fell to my experience one of the most profound and maddening shocks capable of reception by the human mind. without warning, i heard the heavy door behind me creak slowly open upon its rusted hinges. my immediate sensations were incapable of analysis. to be confronted in a place as thoroughly deserted as i had deemed the old castle with evidence of the presence of man or spirit produced in my brain a horror of the most acute description. when at last i turned and faced the seat of the sound, my eyes must have started from their orbits at the sight that they beheld. there in the ancient gothic doorway stood a human figure. it was that of a man clad in a skullcap and long mediaeval tunic of dark colour. his long hair and flowing beard were of a terrible and intense black hue, and of incredible profusion. his forehead, high beyond the usual dimensions; his cheeks, deepsunken and heavily lined with wrinkles; and his hands, long, clawlike, and gnarled, were of such a deadly marblelike whiteness as i have never elsewhere seen in man. his figure, lean to the proportions of a skeleton, was strangely bent and almost lost within the voluminous folds of his peculiar garment. but strangest of all were his eyes, twin caves of abysmal blackness, profound in expression of understanding, yet inhuman in degree of wickedness. these were now fixed upon me, piercing my soul with their hatred, and rooting me to the spot whereon i stood. at last the figure spoke in a rumbling voice that chilled me through with its dull hollowness and latent malevolence. the language in which the discourse was clothed was that debased form of latin in use amongst the more learned men of the middle ages, and made familiar to me by my prolonged researches into the works of the old alchemists and demonologists. the apparition spoke of the curse which had hovered over my house, told me of my coming end, dwelt on the wrong perpetrated by my ancestor against old michel mauvais, and gloated over the revenge of charles le sorcier. he told how young charles has escaped into the night, returning in after years to kill godfrey the heir with an arrow just as he approached the age which had been his fathers at his assassination; how he had secretly returned to the estate and established himself, unknown, in the even then deserted subterranean chamber whose doorway now framed the hideous narrator, how he had seized robert, son of godfrey, in a field, forced poison down his throat, and left him to die at the age of thirtytwo, thus maintaing the foul provisions of his vengeful curse. at this point i was left to imagine the solution of the greatest mystery of all, how the curse had been fulfilled since that time when charles le sorcier must in the course of nature have died, for the man digressed into an account of the deep alchemical studies of the two wizards, father and son, speaking most particularly of the researches of charles le sorcier concerning the elixir which should grant to him who partook of it eternal life and youth. his enthusiasm had seemed for the moment to remove from his terrible eyes the black malevolence that had first so haunted me, but suddenly the fiendish glare returned and, with a shocking sound like the hissing of a serpent, the stranger raised a glass phial with the evident intent of ending my life as had charles le sorcier, six hundred years before, ended that of my ancestor. prompted by some preserving instinct of selfdefense, i broke through the spell that had hitherto held me immovable, and flung my now dying torch at the creature who menaced my existence. i heard the phial break harmlessly against the stones of the passage as the tunic of the strange man caught fire and lit the horrid scene with a ghastly radiance. the shriek of fright and impotent malice emitted by the wouldbe assassin proved too much for my already shaken nerves, and i fell prone upon the slimy floor in a total faint. when at last my senses returned, all was frightfully dark, and my mind, remembering what had occurred, shrank from the idea of beholding any more; yet curiosity overmastered all. who, i asked myself, was this man of evil, and how came he within the castle walls? why should he seek to avenge the death of michel mauvais, and how bad the curse been carried on through all the long centuries since the time of charles le sorcier? the dread of years was lifted from my shoulder, for i knew that he whom i had felled was the source of all my danger from the curse; and now that i was free, i burned with the desire to learn more of the sinister thing which had haunted my line for centuries, and made of my own youth one longcontinued nightmare. determined upon further exploration, i felt in my pockets for flint and steel, and lit the unused torch which i had with me. first of all, new light revealed the distorted and blackened form of the mysterious stranger. the hideous eyes were now closed. disliking the sight, i turned away and entered the chamber beyond the gothic door. here i found what seemed much like an alchemists laboratory. in one corner was an immense pile of shining yellow metal that sparkled gorgeously in the light of the torch. it may have been gold, but i did not pause to examine it, for i was strangely affected by that which i had undergone. at the farther end of the apartment was an opening leading out into one of the many wild ravines of the dark hillside forest. filled with wonder, yet now realizing how the man had obtained access to the chauteau, i proceeded to return. i had intended to pass by the remains of the stranger with averted face but, as i approached the body, i seemed to hear emanating from it a faint sound, as though life were not yet wholly extinct. aghast, i turned to examine the charred and shrivelled figure on the floor. then all at once the horrible eyes, blacker even than the seared face in which they were set, opened wide with an expression which i was unable to interpret. the cracked lips tried to frame words which i could not well understand. once i caught the name of charles le sorcier, and again i fancied that the words years and curse issued from the twisted mouth. still i was at a loss to gather the purport of his disconnnected speech. at my evident ignorance of his meaning, the pitchy eyes once more flashed malevolently at me, until, helpless as i saw my opponent to be, i trembled as i watched him. suddenly the wretch, animated with his last burst of strength, raised his piteous head from the damp and sunken pavement. then, as i remained, paralyzed with fear, he found his voice and in his dying breath screamed forth those words which have ever afterward haunted my days and nights. fool! he shrieked, can you not guess my secret? have you no brain whereby you may recognize the will which has through six long centuries fulfilled the dreadful curse upon the house? have i not told you of the great elixir of eternal life? know you not how the secret of alchemy was solved? i tell you, it is i! i! i! that have lived for six hundred years to maintain my revenge, for i am charles le sorcier! the most merciful thing in the world, i think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. we live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. the sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the light into the peace and safety of a new dark age. theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents. they have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism. but it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden eons which chills me when i think of it and maddens me when i dream of it. that glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated things in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor. i hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if i live, i shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. i think that the professor, too intented to keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him. as my greatuncles heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, i was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in boston. much of the material which i correlated will be later published by the american archaeological society, but there was one box which i found exceedingly puzzling, and which i felt much averse from showing to other eyes. it had been locked and i did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor carried in his pocket. then, indeed, i succeeded in opening it, but when i did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. for what could be the meaning of the queer clay basrelief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which i found? had my uncle, in his latter years become credulous of the most superficial impostures? i resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old mans peace of mind. the basrelief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for, although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. and writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much the papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations. above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evident pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature. it seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. if i say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, i shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. a pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shockingly frightful. behind the figure was a vague suggestions of a cyclopean architectural background. on the ocassion of the visit, ran the professors manuscript, the sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his hosts archeological knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics of the basrelief. he spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archeology. young wilcoxs rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which i have since found highly characteristic of him. he said, it is new, indeed, for i made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding tyre, or the contemplative sphinx, or gardengirdled babylon. it was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. there had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in new england for some years; and wilcoxs imagination had been keenly affected. upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great cyclopean cities of titan blocks and skyflung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror. hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters: cthulhu fhtagn. this verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed professor angell. he questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with frantic intensity the basrelief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his night clothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly over him. my uncle blamed his old age, wilcox afterwards said, for his slowness in recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body. when professor angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for future reports of dreams. this bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imaginery whose burden was always some terrible cyclopean vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonously in enigmatical senseimpacts uninscribable save as gibberish. the two sounds frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters cthulhu and rlyeh. he at no time fully described this object but occasional frantic words, as repeated by dr. tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dreamsculpture. reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young mans subsidence into lethargy. his temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder. ii. the tale of inspector legrasse. the older matters which had made the sculptors dream and basrelief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript. once before, it appears, professor angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as cthulhu; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connexion that it is small wonder he pursued young wilcox with queries and demands for data. the chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplacelooking middleaged man who had travelled all the way from new orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any local source. his name was john raymond legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of police. with him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determine. it must not be fancied that inspector legrasse had the least interest in archaeology. on the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional considerations. the statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of new orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realise that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the african voodoo circles. of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountainhead. inspector legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering created. one sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. no recognised school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface of unplaceable stone. the figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship. it represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopuslike head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubberylooking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. this thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. the tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubledup, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way clown toward the bottom of the pedestal. the cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the crouchers elevated knees. the aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown. its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did it shew with any known type of art belonging to civilisations youth or indeed to any other time. totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenishblack stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. the characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of half the worlds expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. they, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it. something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no part. and yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the inspectors problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. this person was the late william channing webb, professor of anthropology in princeton university, and an explorer of no slight note. professor webb had been engaged, fortyeight years before, in a tour of greenland and iceland in search of some runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the west greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devilworship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. it was a faith of which other esquimaux knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient aeons before ever the world was made. besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this professor webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizardpriest, expressing the sounds in roman letters as best he knew how. but just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs. it was, the professor stated, a very crude basrelief of stone, comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. and so far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting. this data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to inspector legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant with questions. having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cultworshippers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist esquimaux. there then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. what, in substance, both the esquimaux wizards and the louisiana swamppriests had chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this: the worddivisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud: phnglui mglwnafh cthulhu rlyeh wgahnagl fhtagn. legrasse had one point in advance of professor webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant. this text, as given, ran something like this: in his house at rlyeh dead cthulhu waits dreaming. and now, in response to a general and urgent demand, inspector legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a story to which i could see my uncle attached profound significance. it savoured of the wildest dreams of mythmaker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such halfcastes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it. so a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. at the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came. ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragment of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to create. at length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns. the muffled beat of tomtoms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. a reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through pale undergrowth beyond the endless avenues of forest night. reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused pointblank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so inspector legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before. the region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. there were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered that batwinged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. they said it had been there before diberville, before la salle, before the indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. it was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. but it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away. the present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents. only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by legrasses men as they ploughed on through the black morass toward the red glare and muffled tomtoms. there are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other. animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstacies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. now and then the less organized ululation would cease, and from what seemed a welldrilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsong chant that hideous phrase or ritual: phnglui mglwnafh cthulhu rlyeh wgahnagl fhtagn. then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror. in a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acres extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. on this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a sime or an angarola could paint. void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and writhing about a monstrous ringshaped bonfire; in the centre of which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette. from a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flamegirt monolith as a centre hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared. it was inside this circle that the ring of worshippers jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless bacchanal between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire. it may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror. this man, joseph d. galvez, i later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. he indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees but i suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition. actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout. for five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end legrasse was able to count some fortyseven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellowprisoners. the image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by legrasse. examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixedblooded, and mentally aberrant type. most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely west indians or brava portuguese from the cape verde islands, gave a colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. but before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved. degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprising consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith. they worshipped, so they said, the great old ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. those old ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had never died. this was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of rlyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway. some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him. meanwhile no more must be told. there was a secret which even torture could not extract. mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few. but these were not the great old ones. no man had ever seen the old ones. the carven idol was great cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him. no one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth. the chanted ritual was not the secret that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. the chant meant only this: in his house at rlyeh dead cthulhu waits dreaming. only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to various institutions. all denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by black winged ones which had come to them from their immemorial meetingplace in the haunted wood. but of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. what the police did extract, came mainly from the immensely aged mestizo named castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of china. old castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. there had been aeons when other things ruled on the earth, and they had had great cities. remains of them, he said the deathless chinamen had told him, were still be found as cyclopean stones on islands in the pacific. they all died vast epochs of time before men came, but there were arts which could revive them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity. they had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought their images with them. these great old ones, castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood. they had shape for did not this starfashioned image prove it? but that shape was not made of matter. when the stars were right, they could plunge from world to world through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, they could not live. but although they no longer lived, they would never really die. they all lay in stone houses in their great city of rlyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty cthulhu for a glorious surrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready for them. but at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate their bodies. the spells that preserved them intact likewise prevented them from making an initial move, and they could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by. they knew all that was occurring in the universe, for their mode of speech was transmitted thought. even now they talked in their tombs. when, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the great old ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for only thus could their language reach the fleshly minds of mammals. then, whispered castro, those first men formed the cult around tall idols which the great ones shewed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars. that cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great cthulhu from his tomb to revive his subjects and resume his rule of earth. the time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the great old ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and revelling in joy. then the liberated old ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom. meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return. in the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed old ones in dreams, but then something happened. the great stone city rlyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchres, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse. but memory never died, and the highpriests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right. then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up in caverns beneath forgotten seabottoms. but of them old castro dared not speak much. he cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. the size of the old ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. of the cult, he said that he thought the centre lay amid the pathless desert of arabia, where irem, the city of pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. it was not allied to the european witchcult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members. no book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless chinamen said that there were double meanings in the necronomicon of the mad arab abdul alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the muchdiscussed couplet: that is not dead which can eternal lie, and with strange aeons even death may die. legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. the authorities at tulane university could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the greenland tale of professor webb. the feverish interest aroused at the meeting by legrasses tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publications of the society. caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. legrasse for some time lent the image to professor webb, but at the latters death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where i viewed it not long ago. it is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dreamsculpture of young wilcox. that my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor i did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and exact hieroglyphics of the swampfound image and the greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by esquimaux diabolists and mongrel louisianans?. professor angells instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was eminently natural; though privately i suspected young wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncles expense. the dreamnarratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what i thought the most sensible conclusions. so, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of legrasse, i made a trip to providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke i thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man. wilcox still lived alone in the fleurdelys building in thomas street, a hideous victorian imitation of seventeenth century breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely olonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest georgian steeple in america, i found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. he will, i believe, some time be heard from as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallised in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and phantasies which arthur machen evokes in prose, and clark ashton smith makes visible in verse and in painting. dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising. then i told him who i was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study. i did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out. in a short time i became convinced ofhis absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. they and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion. he could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own dream basrelief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands. it was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. that he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncles relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again i strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions. he talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with terrible vividness the damp cyclopean city of slimy green stone whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, halfmental calling from underground: cthulhu fhtagn, cthulhu fhtagn. these words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead cthulhus dreamvigil in his stone vault at rlyeh, and i felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. wilcox, i was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the basrelief, and in the terrible statue i now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. the youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly illmannered, which i could never like, but i was willing enough now to admit both his genius and his honesty. i took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent promises. the matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times i had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connexions. i visited new orleans, talked with legrasse and others of that oldtime raidingparty, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived. old castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. what i now heard so graphically at firsthand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for i felt sure that i was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. my attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as l wish it still were, and i discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by professor angell. one thing i began to suspect, and which i now fear i know, is that my uncles death was far from natural. he fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. i did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cultmembers in louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn of secret methods and rites and beliefs. legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptors data have come to sinister ears?. i think professor angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much. whether i shall go as he did remains to be seen, for i have learned much now. iii. the madness from the sea i had largely given over my inquiries into what professor angell called the cthulhu cult, and was visiting a learned friend in paterson, new jersey; the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note. examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones. it was the sydney bulletin i have mentioned, for my friend had wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a halftone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which legrasse had found in the swamp. eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, i scanned the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. what it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest; and i carefully tore it out for immediate action. it read as follows: mystery derelict found at sea vigilant arrives with helpless armed new zealand yacht in tow. one survivor and dead man found aboard. tale of desperate battle and deaths at sea. rescued seaman refuses particulars of strange experience. odd idol found in his possession. inquiry to follow. this was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of ideas it started in my mind! here were new treasuries of data on the cthulhu cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land. what motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol? what was the unknown island on which six of the emmas crew had died, and about which the mate johansen was so secretive? what had the viceadmiraltys investigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in dunedin? and most marvellous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle? that evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, i bade my host adieu and took a train for san francisco. in less than a month i was in dunedin; where, however, i found that little was known of the strange cultmembers who had lingered in the old seataverns. waterfront scum was far too common for special mentnon; though there was vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills. in auckland i learned that johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in west street and sailed with his wife to his old home in oslo. of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his oslo address. after that i went to sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of the viceadmiralty court. i saw the alert, now sold and in commercial use, at circular quay in sydney cove, but gained nothing from its noncommittal bulk. the crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the museum at hyde park; and i studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material which i had noted in legrasses smaller specimen. geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it. then i thought with a shudder of what old castro had told legrasse about the old ones; they had come from the stars, and had brought their images with them. shaken with such a mental revolution as i had never before known, i now resolved to visit mate johansen in oslo. sailing for london, i reembarked at once for the norwegian capital; and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the egeberg. johansens address, i discovered, lay in the old town of king harold haardrada, which kept alive the name of oslo during all the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as christiana. i made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front. a sadfaced woman in black answered my summons, and i was stung th disappointment when she told me in halting english that gustaf johansen was no more. it was a simple, rambling thing a naive sailors effort at a postfacto diary and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. i cannot attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance, but i will tell its gist enough to shew why the sound the water against the vessels sides became so unendurable to me that i stopped my ears with cotton. johansen, thank god, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the thing, but i shall never sleep calmly again when i think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them upon the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air. i suppose that only a single mountaintop, the hideous monolithcrowned citadel whereon great cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. when i think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there i almost wish to kill myself forthwith. johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet. awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and basreliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the alert, is poignantly visible in every line of the mates frightened description. without knowing what futurism is like, johansen achieved something very close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite structure or building, he dwells only on broad impressions of vast angles and stone surfaces surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper for this earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. i mention his talk about angles because it suggests something wilcox had told me of his awful dreams. he said that the geometry of the dreamplace he saw was abnormal, noneuclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours. now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible reality. johansen and his men landed at a sloping mudbank on this monstrous acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase. the very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarising miasma welling out from this seasoaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance shewed concavity after the first shewed convexity. something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only halfheartedly that they searched vainly, as it proved for some portable souvenir to bear away. it was rodriguez the portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found. the rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squiddragon basrelief. it was, johansen said, like a great barndoor; and they all felt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trapdoor or slantwise like an outside cellardoor. as wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. one could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed phantasmally variable. briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. then donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went. he climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast. then, very softly and slowly, the acregreat lintel began to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was balauced donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal. in this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset. the aperture was black with a darkness almost material. that tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its aeonlong imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. the odour rising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quickeared hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when it lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness. poor johansens handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant. the thing cannot be described there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order. a mountain walked or stumbled. god! what wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant? the thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own. the stars were right again, and what an ageold cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. after vigintillions of years great cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight. three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. god rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. they were donovan, guerrera, and angstrom. parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas of greencrusted rock to the boat, and johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldnt have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse. so only briden and johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated, floundering at the edge of the water. steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the alert under way. slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of odysseus. then, bolder than the storied cyclops, great cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast waveraising strokes of cosmic potency. briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst johansen was wandering deliriously. but johansen had not given out yet. knowing that the thing could surely overtake the alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightninglike on deck and reversed the wheel. there was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon. the awful squidhead with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but johansen drove on relentlessly. there was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler could not put on paper. for an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern; where god in heaven! the scattered plasticity of that nameless skyspawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the alert gained impetus from its mounting steam. out of that dream came rescuethe vigilant, the viceadmiralty court, the streets of dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the egeberg. he could not tell they would think him mad. he would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess. death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories. that was the document i read, and now i have placed it in the tin box beside the basrelief and the papers of professor angell. with it shall go this record of mine this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which i hope may never be pieced together again. i have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. but i do not think my life will be long. as my uncle went, as poor johansen went, so i shall go. i know too much, and the cult still lives. cthulhu still lives, too, i suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded him since the sun was young. his accursed city is sunken once more, for the vigilant sailed over the spot after the april storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idolcapped monoliths in lonely places. he must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. who knows the end? what has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men. a time will come but i must not and cannot think! let me pray that, if i do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye. the rats in the walls with this sole heir denounced as a murderer, the estate had reverted to the crown, nor had the accused man made any attempt to exculpate himself or regain his property. shaken by some horror greater than that of conscience or the law, and expressing only a frantic wish to exclude the ancient edifice from his sight and memory, walter de la poer, eleventh baron exham, fled to virginia and there founded the family which by the next century had become known as delapore. exham priory had remained untenanted, though later allotted to the estates of the norrys family and much studied because of its peculiarly composite architecture; an architecture involving gothic towers resting on a saxon or romanesque substructure, whose foundation in turn was of a still earlier order or blend of orders roman, and even druidic or native cymric, if legends speak truly. this foundation was a very singular thing, being merged on one side with the solid limestone of the precipice from whose brink the priory overlooked a desolate valley three miles west of the village of anchester. architects and antiquarians loved to examine this strange relic of forgotten centuries, but the country folk hated it. they had hated it hundreds of years before, when my ancestors lived there, and they hated it now, with the moss and mould of abandonment on it. i had not been a day in anchester before i knew i came of an accursed house. and this week workmen have blown up exham priory, and are busy obliterating the traces of its foundations. the bare statistics of my ancestry i had always known, together with the fact that my first american forebear had come to the colonies under a strange cloud. of details, however, i had been kept wholly ignorant through the policy of reticence always maintained by the delapores. unlike our planter neighbours, we seldom boasted of crusading ancestors or other mediaeval and renaissance heroes; nor was any kind of tradition handed down except what may have been recorded in the sealed envelope left before the civil war by every squire to his eldest son for posthumous opening. the glories we cherished were those achieved since the migration; the glories of a proud and honourable, if somewhat reserved and unsocial virginia line. during the war our fortunes were extinguished and our whole existence changed by the burning of carfax, our home on the banks of the james. my grandfather, advanced in years, had perished in that incendiary outrage, and with him the envelope that had bound us all to the past. i can recall that fire today as i saw it then at the age of seven, with the federal soldiers shouting, the women screaming, and the negroes howling and praying. my father was in the army, defending richmond, and after many formalities my mother and i were passed through the lines to join him. when the war ended we all moved north, whence my mother had come; and i grew to manhood, middle age, and ultimate wealth as a stolid yankee. neither my father nor i ever knew what our hereditary envelope had contained, and as i merged into the greyness of massachusetts business life i lost all interest in the mysteries which evidently lurked far back in my family tree. had i suspected their nature, how gladly i would have left exham priory to its moss, bats and cobwebs! as i gradually recovered the image of the edifice as it had been when my ancestors left it over three centuries before, i began to hire workmen for the reconstruction. in every case i was forced to go outside the immediate locality, for the anchester villagers had an almost unbelievable fear and hatred of the place. the sentiment was so great that it was sometimes communicated to the outside labourers, causing numerous desertions; whilst its scope appeared to include both the priory and its ancient family. my son had told me that he was somewhat avoided during his visits because he was a de la poer, and i now found myself subtly ostracized for a like reason until i convinced the peasants how little i knew of my heritage. even then they sullenly disliked me, so that i had to collect most of the village traditions through the mediation of norrys. what the people could not forgive, perhaps, was that i had come to restore a symbol so abhorrent to them; for, rationally or not, they viewed exham priory as nothing less than a haunt of fiends and werewolves. piecing together the tales which norrys collected for me, and supplementing them with the accounts of several savants who had studied the ruins, i deduced that exham priory stood on the site of a prehistoric temple; a druidical or antedruidical thing which must have been contemporary with stonehenge. that indescribable rites had been celebrated there, few doubted, and there were unpleasant tales of the transference of these rites into the cybele worship which the romans had introduced. the worst characters, apparently, were the barons and their direct heirs; at least, most was whispered about these. if of healthier inclinations, it was said, an heir would early and mysteriously die to make way for another more typical scion. there seemed to be an inner cult in the family, presided over by the head of the house, and sometimes closed except to a few members. temperament rather than ancestry was evidently the basis of this cult, for it was entered by several who married into the family. lady margaret trevor from cornwall, wife of godfrey, the second son of the fifth baron, became a favourite bane of children all over the countryside, and the daemon heroine of a particularly horrible old ballad not yet extinct near the welsh border. preserved in balladry, too, though not illustrating the same point, is the hideous tale of lady mary de la poer, who shortly after her marriage to the earl of shrewsfield was killed by him and his mother, both of the slayers being absolved and blessed by the priest to whom they confessed what they dared not repeat to the world. these myths and ballads, typical as they were of crude superstition, repelled me greatly. their persistence, and their application to so long a line of my ancestors, were especially annoying; whilst the imputations of monstrous habits proved unpleasantly reminiscent of the one known scandal of my immediate forebears the case of my cousin, young randolph delapore of carfax who went among the negroes and became a voodoo priest after he returned from the mexican war. i was much less disturbed by the vaguer tales of wails and howlings in the barren, windswept valley beneath the limestone cliff; of the graveyard stenches after the spring rains; of the floundering, squealing white thing on which sir john claves horse had trod one night in a lonely field; and of the servant who had gone mad at what he saw in the priory in the full light of day. these things were hackneyed spectral lore, and i was at that time a pronounced sceptic. the accounts of vanished peasants were less to be dismissed, though not especially significant in view of mediaeval custom. prying curiosity meant death, and more than one severed head had been publicly shown on the bastions now effaced around exham priory. a few of the tales were exceedingly picturesque, and made me wish i had learnt more of the comparative mythology in my youth. there was, for instance, the belief that a legion of batwinged devils kept witches sabbath each night at the priory a legion whose sustenance might explain the disproportionate abundance of coarse vegetables harvested in the vast gardens. and, most vivid of all, there was the dramatic epic of the rats the scampering army of obscene vermin which had burst forth from the castle three months after the tragedy that doomed it to desertion the lean, filthy, ravenous army which had swept all before it and devoured fowl, cats, dogs, hogs, sheep, and even two hapless human beings before its fury was spent. around that unforgettable rodent army a whole separate cycle of myths revolves, for it scattered among the village homes and brought curses and horrors in its train. such was the lore that assailed me as i pushed to completion, with an elderly obstinacy, the work of restoring my ancestral home. it must not be imagined for a moment that these tales formed my principal psychological environinent. on the other hand, i was constantly praised and encouraged by capt. norrys and the antiquarians who surrounded and aided me. when the task was done, over two years after its commencement, i viewed the great rooms, wainscoted walls, vaulted ceilings, mullioned windows, and broad staircases with a pride which fully compensated for the prodigious expense of the restoration. every attribute of the middle ages was cunningly reproduced and the new parts blended perfectly with the original walls and foundations. the seat of my fathers was complete, and i looked forward to redeeming at last the local fame of the line which ended in me. i could reside here permanently, and prove that a de la poer (for i had adopted again the original spelling of the name) need not be a fiend. my comfort was perhaps augmented by the fact that, although exham priory was mediaevally fitted, its interior was in truth wholly new and free from old vermin and old ghosts alike. for five days our routine proceeded with the utmost placidity, my time being spent mostly in the codification of old family data. i had now obtained some very circumstantial accounts of the final tragedy and flight of walter de la poer, which i conceived to be the probable contents of the hereditary paper lost in the fire at carfax. it appeared that my ancestor was accused with much reason of having killed all the other members of his household, except four servant confederates, in their sleep, about two weeks after a shocking discovery which changed his whole demeanour, but which, except by implication, he disclosed to no one save perhaps the servants who assisted him and afterwards fled beyond reach. this deliberate slaughter, which included a father, three brothers, and two sisters, was largely condoned by the villagers, and so slackly treated by the law that its perpetrator escaped honoured, unharmed, and undisguised to virginia; the general whispered sentiment being that he had purged the land of an immemorial curse. what discovery had prompted an act so terrible, i could scarcely even conjecture. walter de la poer must have known for years the sinister tales about his family, so that this material could have given him no fresh impulse. had he, then, witnessed some appalling ancient rite, or stumbled upon some frightful and revealing symbol in the priory or its vicinity? he was reputed to have been a shy, gentle youth in england. in virginia he seemed not so much hard or bitter as harassed and apprehensive. he was spoken of in the diary of another gentleman adventurer, francis harley of bellview, as a man of unexampled justice, honour, and delicacy. what i afterward remembered is merely this that my old black cat, whose moods i know so well, was undoubtedly alert and anxious to an extent wholly out of keeping with his natural character. he roved from room to room, restless and disturbed, and sniffed constantly about the walls which formed part of the gothic structure. i realize how trite this sounds like the inevitable dog in the ghost story, which always growls before his master sees the sheeted figure yet i cannot consistently suppress it. the following day a servant complained of restlessness among all the cats in the house. he came to me in my study, a lofty west room on the second storey, with groined arches, black oak panelling, and a triple gothic window overlooking the limestone cliff and desolate valley; and even as he spoke i saw the jetty form of niggerman creeping along the west wall and scratching at the new panels which overlaid the ancient stone. i told the man that there must be a singular odour or emanation from the old stonework, imperceptible to human senses, but affecting the delicate organs of cats even through the new woodwork. this i truly believed, and when the fellow suggested the presence of mice or rats, i mentioned that there had been no rats there for three hundred years, and that even the field mice of the surrounding country could hardly be found in these high walls, where they had never been known to stray. that afternoon i called on capt. norrys, and he assured me that it would be quite incredible for field mice to infest the priory in such a sudden and unprecedented fashion. that night, dispensing as usual with a valet, i retired in the west tower chamber which i had chosen as my own, reached from the study by a stone staircase and short gallery the former partly ancient, the latter entirely restored. this room was circular, very high, and without wainscoting, being hung with arras which i had myself chosen in london. seeing that niggerman was with me, i shut the heavy gothic door and retired by the light of the electric bulbs which so cleverly counterfeited candles, finally switching off the light and sinking on the carved and canopied fourposter, with the venerable cat in his accustomed place across my feet. i did not draw the curtains, but gazed out at the narrow window which i faced. there was a suspicion of aurora in the sky, and the delicate traceries of the window were pleasantly silhouetted. at some time i must have fallen quietly asleep, for i recall a distinct sense of leaving strange dreams, when the cat started violently from his placid position. i saw him in the faint auroral glow, head strained forward, fore feet on my ankles, and hind feet stretched behind. he was looking intensely at a point on the wall somewhat west of the window, a point which to my eye had nothing to mark it, but toward which all my attention was now directed. and as i watched, i knew that niggerman was not vainly excited. whether the arras actually moved i cannot say. i think it did, very slightly. but what i can swear to is that behind it i heard a low, distinct scurrying as of rats or mice. in a moment the cat had jumped bodily on the screening tapestry, bringing the affected section to the floor with his weight, and exposing a damp, ancient wall of stone; patched here and there by the restorers, and devoid of any trace of rodent prowlers. niggerman raced up and down the floor by this part of the wall, clawing the fallen arras and seemingly trying at times to insert a paw between the wall and the oaken floor. he found nothing, and after a time returned wearily to his place across my feet. i had not moved, but i did not sleep again that night. in the morning i questioned all the servants, and found that none of them had noticed anything unusual, save that the cook remembered the actions of a cat which had rested on her windowsill. this cat had howled at some unknown hour of the night, awaking the cook in time for her to see him dart purposefully out of the open door down the stairs. i drowsed away the noontime, and in the afternoon called again on capt. norrys, who became exceedingly interested in what i told him. the odd incidents so slight yet so curious appealed to his sense of the picturesque and elicited from him a number of reminiscenses of local ghostly lore. we were genuinely perplexed at the presence of rats, and norrys lent me some traps and paris green, which i had the servants place in strategic localities when i returned. i retired early, being very sleepy, but was harassed by dreams of the most horrible sort. i seemed to be looking down from an immense height upon a twilit grotto, kneedeep with filth, where a whitebearded daemon swineherd drove about with his staff a flock of fungous, flabby beasts whose appearance filled me with unutterable loathing. then, as the swineherd paused and nodded over his task, a mighty swarm of rats rained down on the stinking abyss and fell to devouring beasts and man alike. from this terrific vision i was abruptly awakened by the motions of niggerman, who had been sleeping as usual across my feet. this time i did not have to question the source of his snarls and hisses, and of the fear which made him sink his claws into my ankle, unconscious of their effect; for on every side of the chamber the walls were alive with nauseous sound the veminous slithering of ravenous, gigantic rats. there was now no aurora to show the state of the arras the fallen section of which had been replaced but i was not too frightened to switch on the light. as the bulbs leapt into radiance i saw a hideous shaking all over the tapestry, causing the somewhat peculiar designs to execute a singular dance of death. this motion disappeared almost at once, and the sound with it. springing out of bed, i poked at the arras with the long handle of a warmingpan that rested near, and lifted one section to see what lay beneath. there was nothing but the patched stone wall, and even the cat had lost his tense realization of abnormal presences. when i examined the circular trap that had been placed in the room, i found all of the openings sprung, though no trace remained of what had been caught and had escaped. further sleep was out of the question, so lighting a candle, i opened the door and went out in the gallery towards the stairs to my study, niggerman following at my heels. before we had reached the stone steps, however, the cat darted ahead of me and vanished down the ancient flight. as i descended the stairs myself, i became suddenly aware of sounds in the great room below; sounds of a nature which could not be mistaken. the oakpanelled walls were alive with rats, scampering and milling whilst niggerman was racing about with the fury of a baffled hunter. reaching the bottom, i switched on the light, which did not this time cause the noise to subside. the rats continued their riot, stampeding with such force and distinctness that i could finally assign to their motions a definite direction. these creatures, in numbers apparently inexhaustible, were engaged in one stupendous migration from inconceivable heights to some depth conceivably or inconceivably below. i now heard steps in the corridor, and in another moment two servants pushed open the massive door. they were searching the house for some unknown source of disturbance which had thrown all the cats into a snarling panic and caused them to plunge precipitately down several flights of stairs and squat, yowling, before the closed door to the subcellar. i asked them if they had heard the rats, but they replied in the negative. and when i turned to call their attention to the sounds in the panels, i realized that the noise had ceased. with the two men, i went down to the door of the subcellar, but found the cats already dispersed. later i resolved to explore the crypt below, but for the present i merely made a round of the traps. all were sprung, yet all were tenantless. satisfying myself that no one had heard the rats save the felines and me, i sat in my study till morning, thinking profoundly and recalling every scrap of legend i had unearthed concerning the building i inhabited. i slept some in the forenoon, leaning back in the one comfortable library chair which my mediaeval plan of furnishing could not banish. later i telephoned to capt. norrys, who came over and helped me explore the subcellar. absolutely nothing untoward was found, although we could not repress a thrill at the knowledge that this vault was built by roman hands. every low arch and massive pillar was roman not the debased romanesque of the bungling saxons, but the severe and harmonious classicism of the age of the caesars; indeed, the walls abounded with inscriptions familiar to the antiquarians who had repeatedly explored the place things like p. getae. prop... temp... dona... and l. praeg... vs... pontifi... atys... the reference to atys made me shiver, for i had read catullus and knew something of the hideous rites of the eastern god, whose worship was so mixed with that of cybele. norrys and i, by the light of lanterns, tried to interpret the odd and nearly effaced designs on certain irregularly rectangular blocks of stone generally held to be altars, but could make nothing of them. we remembered that one pattern, a sort of rayed sun, was held by students to imply a nonroman origin suggesting that these altars had merely been adopted by the roman priests from some older and perhaps aboriginal temple on the same site. on one of these blocks were some brown stains which made me wonder. the largest, in the centre of the room, had certain features on the upper surface which indicated its connection with fire probably burnt offerings. such were the sights in that crypt before whose door the cats howled, and where norrys and i now determined to pass the night. couches were brought down by the servants, who were told not to mind any nocturnal actions of the cats, and niggerman was admitted as much for help as for companionship. we decided to keep the great oak door a modern replica with slits for ventilation tightly closed; and, with this attended to, we retired with lanterns still burning to await whatever might occur. the vault was very deep in the foundations of the priory, and undoubtedly far down on the face of the beetling limestone cliff overlooking the waste valley. that it had been the goal of the scuffling and unexplainable rats i could not doubt, though why, i could not tell. as we lay there expectantly, i found my vigil occasionally mixed with halfformed dreams from which the uneasy motions of the cat across my feet would rouse me. these dreams were not wholesome, but horribly like the one i had had the night before. i saw again the twilit grotto, and the swineherd with his unmentionable fungous beasts wallowing in filth, and as i looked at these things they seemed nearer and more distinct so distinct that i could almost observe their features. then i did observe the flabby features of one of them and awakened with such a scream that niggerman started up, whilst capt. norrys, who had not slept, laughed considerably. norrys might have laughed more or perhaps less had he known what it was that made me scream. but i did not remember myself till later. ultimate horror often paralyses memory in a merciful way. norrys waked me when the phenomena began. out of the same frightful dream i was called by his gentle shaking and his urging to listen to the cats. indeed, there was much to listen to, for beyond the closed door at the head of the stone steps was a veritable nightmare of feline yelling and clawing, whilst niggerman, unmindful of his kindred outside, was running excitedly round the bare stone walls, in which i heard the same babel of scurrying rats that had troubled me the night before. an acute terror now rose within me, for here were anomalies which nothing normal could well explain. these rats, if not the creatures of a madness which i shared with the cats alone, must be burrowing and sliding in roman walls i had thought to be solid limestone blocks ... unless perhaps the action of water through more than seventeen centuries had eaten winding tunnels which rodent bodies had worn clear and ample ... but even so, the spectral horror was no less; for if these were living vermin why did not norrys hear their disgusting commotion? why did he urge me to watch niggerman and listen to the cats outside, and why did he guess wildly and vaguely at what could have aroused them? by the time i had managed to tell him, as rationally as i could, what i thought i was hearing, my ears gave me the last fading impression of scurrying; which had retreated still downward, far underneath this deepest of subcellars till it seemed as if the whole cliff below were riddled with questing rats. norrys was not as sceptical as i had anticipated, but instead seemed profoundly moved. he motioned to me to notice that the cats at the door had ceased their clamour, as if giving up the rats for lost; whilst niggerman had a burst of renewed restlessness, and was clawing frantically around the bottom of the large stone altar in the centre of the room, which was nearer norrys couch than mine. my fear of the unknown was at this point very great. something astounding had occurred, and i saw that capt. norrys, a younger, stouter, and presumably more naturally materialistic man, was affected fully as much as myself perhaps because of his lifelong and intimate familiarity with local legend. we could for the moment do nothing but watch the old black cat as he pawed with decreasing fervour at the base of the altar, occasionally looking up and mewing to me in that persuasive manner which he used when he wished me to perform some favour for him. norrys now took a lantern close to the altar and examined the place where niggerman was pawing; silently kneeling and scraping away the lichens of the centuries which joined the massive preroman block to the tessellated floor. he did not find anything, and was about to abandon his efforts when i noticed a trivial circumstance which made me shudder, even though it implied nothing more than i had already imagined. i told him of it, and we both looked at its almost imperceptible manifestation with the fixedness of fascinated discovery and acknowledgment. it was only this that the flame of the lantern set down near the altar was slightly but certainly flickering from a draught of air which it had not before received, and which came indubitably from the crevice between floor and altar where norrys was scraping away the lichens. we spent the rest of the night in the brilliantlylighted study, nervously discussing what we should do next. the discovery that some vault deeper than the deepest known masonry of the romans underlay this accursed pile, some vault unsuspected by the curious antiquarians of three centuries, would have been sufficient to excite us without any background of the sinister. as it was, the fascination became twofold; and we paused in doubt whether to abandon our search and quit the priory forever in superstitious caution, or to gratify our sense of adventure and brave whatever horrors might await us in the unknown depths. by morning we had compromised, and decided to go to london to gather a group of archaeologists and scientific men fit to cope with the mystery. it should be mentioned that before leaving the subcellar we had vainly tried to move the central altar which we now recognized as the gate to a new pit of nameless fear. what secret would open the gate, wiser men than we would have to find. during many days in london capt. norrys and i presented our facts, conjectures, and legendary anecdotes to five eminent authorities, all men who could be trusted to respect any family disclosures which future explorations might develop. we found most of them little disposed to scoff but, instead, intensely interested and sincerely sympathetic. it is hardly necessary to name them all, but i may say that they included sir william brinton, whose excavations in the troad excited most of the world in their day. as we all took the train for anchester i felt myself poised on the brink of frightful revelations, a sensation symbolized by the air of mourning among the many americans at the unexpected death of the president on the other side of the world. i myself retired in my own tower chamber, with niggerman across my feet. sleep came quickly, but hideous dreams assailed me. there was a vision of a roman feast like that of trimalchio, with a horror in a covered platter. then came that damnable, recurrent thing about the swineherd and his filthy drove in the twilit grotto. yet when i awoke it was full daylight, with normal sounds in the house below. the rats, living or spectral, had not troubled me; and niggerman was still quietly asleep. on going down, i found that the same tranquillity had prevailed elsewhere; a condition which one of the assembled servants a fellow named thornton, devoted to the psychic rather absurdly laid to the fact that i had now been shown the thing which certain forces had wished to show me. there now lay revealed such a horror as would have overwhelmed us had we not been prepared. through a nearly square opening in the tiled floor, sprawling on a flight of stone steps so prodigiously worn that it was little more than an inclined plane at the centre, was a ghastly array of human or semihuman bones. those which retained their collocation as skeletons showed attitudes of panic fear, and over all were the marks of rodent gnawing. the skulls denoted nothing short of utter idiocy, cretinism, or primitive semiapedom. above the hellishly littered steps arched a descending passage seemingly chiselled from the solid rock, and conducting a current of air. this current was not a sudden and noxious rush as from a closed vault, but a cool breeze with something of freshness in it. we did not pause long, but shiveringly began to clear a passage down the steps. it was then that sir william, examining the hewn walls, made the odd observation that the passage, according to the direction of the strokes, must have been chiselled from beneath. i must be very deliberate now, and choose my words. after ploughing down a few steps amidst the gnawled bones we saw that there was light ahead; not any mystic phosphorescence, but a filtered daylight which could not come except from unknown fissures in the cliff that overlooked the waste valley. that such fissures had escaped notice from outside was hardly remarkable, for not only is the valley wholly uninhabited, but the cliff is so high and beetling that only an aeronaut could study its face in detail. a few steps more, and our breaths were literally snatched from us by what we saw; so literally that thornton, the psychic investigator, actually fainted in the arms of the dazed mem who stood behind him. norrys, his plump face utterly white and flabby, simply cried out inarticulately; whilst i think that what i did was to gasp or hiss, and cover my eyes. the man behind me the only one of the party older than i croaked the hackneyed my god! in the most cracked voice i ever heard. of seven cultivated men, only sir william brinton retained his composure, a thing the more to his credit because he led the party and must have seen the sight first. it was a twilit grotto of enormous height, stretching away farther than any eye could see; a subterraneous world of limitless mystery and horrible suggestion. there were buildings and other architectural remains in one terrified glance i saw a weird pattern of tumuli, a savage circle of monoliths, a lowdomed roman ruin, a sprawling saxon pile, and an early english edifice of wood but all these were dwarfed by the ghoulish spectacle presented by the general surface of the ground. for yards about the steps extended an insane tangle of human bones, or bones at least as human as those on the steps. like a foamy sea they stretched, some fallen apart, but others wholly or partly articulated as skeletons; these latter invariably in postures of daemoniac frenzy, either fighting off some menace or clutching other forms with cannibal intent. when dr trask, the anthropologist, stopped to classify the skulls, he found a degraded mixture which utterly baffled him. they were mostly lower than the piltdown man in the scale of evolution, but in every case definitely human. many were of higher grade, and a very few were the skulls of supremely and sensitively developed types. all the bones were gnawed, mostly by rats, but somewhat by others of the halfhuman drove. mixed with them were many tiny hones of rats fallen members of the lethal army which closed the ancient epic. i wonder that any man among us lived and kept his sanity through that hideous day of discovery. not hoffman nor huysmans could conceive a scene more wildly incredible, more frenetically repellent, or more gothically grotesque than the twilit grotto through which we seven staggered; each stumbling on revelation after revelation, and trying to keep for the nonce from thinking of the events which must have taken place there three hundred, or a thousand, or two thousand or ten thousand years ago. it was the antechamber of hell, and poor thornton fainted again when trask told him that some of the skeleton things must have descended as quadrupeds through the last twenty or more generations. horror piled on horror as we began to interpret the architectural remains. the quadruped things with their occasional recruits from the biped class had been kept in stone pens, out of which they must have broken in their last delirium of hunger or ratfear. there had been great herds of them, evidently fattened on the coarse vegetables whose remains could be found as a sort of poisonous ensilage at the bottom of the huge stone bins older than rome. i knew now why my ancestors had had such excessive gardens would to heaven i could forget! the purpose of the herds i did not have to ask. what i did venture to enter was the low saxon building whose oaken door had fallen, and there i found a terrible row of ten stone cells with rusty bars. three had tenants, all skeletons of high grade, and on the bony forefinger of one i found a seal ring with my own coatofarms. sir william found a vault with far older cells below the roman chapel, but these cells were empty. below them was a low crypt with cases of formally arranged bones, some of them bearing terrible parallel inscriptions carved in latin, greek, and the tongue of phyrgia. meanwhile, dr trask had opened one of the prehistoric tumuli, and brought to light skulls which were slightly more human than a gorillas, and which bore indescribably ideographic carvings. through all this horror my cat stalked unperturbed. once i saw him monstrously perched atop a mountain of bones, and wondered at the secrets that might lie behind his yellow eyes. having grasped to some slight degree the frightful revelations of this twilit area an area so hideously foreshadowed by my recurrent dream we turned to that apparently boundless depth of midnight cavern where no ray of light from the cliff could penetrate. we shall never know what sightless stygian worlds yawn beyond the little distance we went, for it was decided that such secrets are not good for mankind. but there was plenty to engross us close at hand, for we had not gone far before the searchlights showed that accursed infinity of pits in which the rats had feasted, and whose sudden lack of replenishment had driven the ravenous rodent army first to turn on the living herds of starving things, and then to burst forth from the priory in that historic orgy of devastation which the peasants will never forget. god! those carrion black pits of sawed, picked bones and opened skulls! those nightmare chasms choked with the pithecanthropoid, celtic, roman, and english bones of countless unhallowed centuries! some of them were full, and none can say how deep they had once been. others were still bottomless to our searchlights, and peopled by unnamable fancies. what, i thought, of the hapless rats that stumbled into such traps amidst the blackness of their quests in this grisly tartarus? once my foot slipped near a horribly yawning brink, and i had a moment of ecstatic fear. i must have been musing a long time, for i could not see any of the party but plump capt. norrys. then there came a sound from that inky, boundless, farther distance that i thought i knew; and i saw my old black cat dart past me like a winged egyptian god, straight into the illimitable gulf of the unknown. but i was not far behind, for there was no doubt after another second. it was the eldritch scurrying of those fiendborn rats, always questing for new horrors, and determined to lead me on even unto those grinning caverns of earths centre where nyarlathotep, the mad faceless god, howls blindly in the darkness to the piping of two amorphous idiot fluteplayers. my searchlight expired, but still i ran. i heard voices, and yowls, and echoes, but above all there gently rose that impious, insidious scurrying; gently rising, rising, as a stiff bloated corpse gently rises above an oily river that flows under the endless onyx bridges to a black, putrid sea. something bumped into me something soft and plump. it must have been the rats; the viscous, gelatinous, ravenous army that feast on the dead and the living ... why shouldnt rats eat a de la poer as a de la poer eats forbidden things? ... the war ate my boy, damn them all ... and the yanks ate carfax with flames and burnt grandsire delapore and the secret ... no, no, i tell you, i am not that daemon swineherd in the twilit grotto! it was not edward norrys fat face on that flabby fungous thing! who says i am a de la poer? he lived, but my boy died! ... shall a norrys hold the land of a de la poer? ... its voodoo, i tell you ... that spotted snake ... curse you, thornton, ill teach you to faint at what my family do! ... sblood, thou stinkard, ill learn ye how to gust ... wolde ye swynke me thilke wys?... magna mater! magna mater!... atys... dia ad aghaidhs ad aodaun... agus bas dunarch ort! dhonas s dholas ort, agus leatsa!... ungl unl... rrlh ... chchch... this is what they say i said when they found me in the blackness after three hours; found me crouching in the blackness over the plump, halfeaten body of capt. norrys, with my own cat leaping and tearing at my throat. now they have blown up exham priory, taken my niggerman away from me, and shut me into this barred room at hanwell with fearful whispers about my heredity and experience. thornton is in the next room, but they prevent me from talking to him. they are trying, too, to suppress most of the facts concerning the priory. when i speak of poor norrys they accuse me of this hideous thing, but they must know that i did not do it. they must know it was the rats; the slithering scurrying rats whose scampering will never let me sleep; the daemon rats that race behind the padding in this room and beckon me down to greater horrors than i have ever known; the rats they can never hear; the rats, the rats in the walls. keener newsfollowers, however, wondered at the prodigious number of arrests, the abnormally large force of men used in making them, and the secrecy surrounding the disposal of the prisoners. no trials, or even definite charges were reported; nor were any of the captives seen thereafter in the regular gaols of the nation. there were vague statements about disease and concentration camps, and later about dispersal in various naval and military prisons, but nothing positive ever developed. innsmouth itself was left almost depopulated, and it is even now only beginning to show signs of a sluggishly revived existence. complaints from many liberal organizations were met with long confidential discussions, and representatives were taken on trips to certain camps and prisons. as a result, these societies became surprisingly passive and reticent. newspaper men were harder to manage, but seemed largely to cooperate with the government in the end. only one paper a tabloid always discounted because of its wild policy mentioned the deep diving submarine that discharged torpedoes downward in the marine abyss just beyond devil reef. that item, gathered by chance in a haunt of sailors, seemed indeed rather farfetched; since the low, black reef lay a full mile and a half out from innsmouth harbour. people around the country and in the nearby towns muttered a great deal among themselves, but said very little to the outer world. they had talked about dying and halfdeserted innsmouth for nearly a century, and nothing new could be wilder or more hideous than what they had whispered and hinted at years before. many things had taught them secretiveness, and there was no need to exert pressure on them. besides, they really knew little; for wide salt marshes, desolate and unpeopled, kept neighbors off from innsmouth on the landward side. but at last i am going to defy the ban on speech about this thing. results, i am certain, are so thorough that no public harm save a shock of repulsion could ever accrue from a hinting of what was found by those horrified men at innsmouth. besides, what was found might possibly have more than one explanation. i do not know just how much of the whole tale has been told even to me, and i have many reasons for not wishing to probe deeper. for my contact with this affair has been closer than that of any other layman, and i have carried away impressions which are yet to drive me to drastic measures. i never heard of innsmouth till the day before i saw it for the first and so far last time. i was celebrating my coming of age by a tour of new england sightseeing, antiquarian, and genealogical and had planned to go directly from ancient newburyport to arkham, whence my mothers family was derived. i had no car, but was travelling by train, trolley and motorcoach, always seeking the cheapest possible route. in newburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to arkham; and it was only at the station ticketoffice, when i demurred at the high fare, that i learned about innsmouth. the stout, shrewdfaced agent, whose speech shewed him to be no local man, seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy, and made a suggestion that none of my other informants had offered. that was the first i ever heard of shadowed innsmouth. any reference to a town not shown on common maps or listed in recent guidebooks would have interested me, and the agents odd manner of allusion roused something like real curiosity. a town able to inspire such dislike in it its neighbors, i thought, must be at least rather unusual, and worthy of a tourists attention. if it came before arkham i would stop off there and so i asked the agent to tell me something about it. he was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling slightly superior to what he said. more empty houses than there are people, i guess, and no business to speak of except fishing and lobstering. everybody trades mostly either here or in arkham or ipswich. once they had quite a few mills, but nothings left now except one gold refinery running on the leanest kind of part time. that refinery, though, used to he a big thing, and old man marsh, who owns it, must be richern croesus. queer old duck, though, and sticks mighty close in his home. hes supposed to have developed some skin disease or deformity late in life that makes him keep out of sight. grandson of captain obed marsh, who founded the business. his mother seems tove been some kind of foreigner they say a south sea islander so everybody raised cain when he married an ipswich girl fifty years ago. they always do that about innsmouth people, and folks here and hereabouts always try to cover up any innsmouth blood they have in em. but marshs children and grandchildren look just like anyone else fars i can see. ive had em pointed out to me here though, come to think of it, the elder children dont seem to be around lately. never saw the old man. you ought to hear, though, what some of the oldtimers tell about the black reef off the coast devil reef, they call it. its well above water a good part of the time, and never much below it, but at that you could hardly call it an island. the story is that theres a whole legion of devils seen sometimes on that reef sprawled about, or darting in and out of some kind of caves near the top. its a rugged, uneven thing, a good bit over a mile out, and toward the end of shipping days sailors used to make big detours just to avoid it. that is, sailors that didnt hail from innsmouth. one of the things they had against old captain marsh was that he was supposed to land on it sometimes at night when the tide was right. maybe he did, for i dare say the rock formation was interesting, and its just barely possible he was looking for pirate loot and maybe finding it; but there was talk of his dealing with demons there. fact is, i guess on the whole it was really the captain that gave the bad reputation to the reef. but the real thing behind the way folks feel is simply race prejudice and i dont say im blaming those that hold it. i hate those innsmouth folks myself, and i wouldnt care to go to their town. i spose you know though i can see youre a westerner by your talk what a lot our new england ships used to have to do with queer ports in africa, asia, the south seas, and everywhere else, and what queer kinds of people they sometimes brought back with em. youve probably heard about the salem man that came home with a chinese wife, and maybe you know theres still a bunch of fiji islanders somewhere around cape cod. well, there must be something like that back of the innsmouth people. the place always was badly cut off from the rest of the country by marshes and creeks and we cant be sure about the ins and outs of the matter; but its pretty clear that old captain marsh must have brought home some odd specimens when he had all three of his ships in commission back in the twenties and thirties. there certainly is a strange kind of streak in the innsmouth folks today i dont know how to explain it but it sort of makes you crawl. youll notice a little in sargent if you take his bus. some of em have queer narrow heads with flat noses and bulgy, starry eyes that never seem to shut, and their skin aint quite right. rough and scabby, and the sides of the necks are all shriveled or creased up. get bald, too, very young. the older fellows look the worst fact is, i dont believe ive ever seen a very old chap of that kind. guess they must die of looking in the glass! animals hate em they used to have lots of horse trouble before the autos came in. nobody around here or in arkham or ipswich will have anything to do with em, and they act kind of offish themselves when they come to town or when anyone tries to fish on their grounds. queer how fish are always thick off innsmouth harbour when there aint any anywhere else around but just try to fish there yourself and see how the folks chase you off! those people used to come here on the railroad walking and taking the train at rowley after the branch was dropped but now they use that bus. yes, theres a hotel in innsmouth called the gilman house but i dont believe it can amount to much. i wouldnt advise you to try it. better stay over here and take the ten oclock bus tomorrow morning; then you can get an evening bus there for arkham at eight oclock. there was a factory inspector who stopped at the gilman a couple of years ago and he had a lot of unpleasant hints about the place. seems they get a queer crowd there, for this fellow heard voices in other rooms though most of em was empty that gave him the shivers. it was foreign talk he thought, but he said the bad thing about it was the kind of voice that sometimes spoke. it sounded so unnatural slopping like, he said that he didnt dare undress and go to sleep. just waited up and lit out the first thing in the morning. the talk went on most all night. this fellow casey, his name was had a lot to say about how the innsmouth folk, watched him and seemed kind of on guard. he found the marsh refinery a queer place its in an old mill on the lower falls of the manuxet. what he said tallied up with what id heard. books in bad shape, and no clear account of any kind of dealings. you know its always been a kind of mystery where the marshes get the gold they refine. theyve never seemed to do much buying in that line, but years ago they shipped out an enormous lot of ingots. used to be talk of a queer foreign kind of jewelry that the sailors and refinery men sometimes sold on the sly, or that was seen once or twice on some of the marsh womenfolks. people allowed maybe old captain obed traded for it in some heathen port, especially since he always ordered stacks of glass beads and trinkets such as seafaring men used to get for native trade. others thought and still think hed found an old pirate cache out on devil reef. but heres a funny thing. the old captains been dead these sixty years, and theres aint been a goodsized ship out of the place since the civil war; but just the same the marshes still keep on buying a few of those native trade things mostly glass and rubber gewgaws, they tell me. maybe the innsmouth folks like em to look at themselves gawd knows theyve gotten to be about as bad as south sea cannibals and guinea savages. nobody can ever keep track of these people, and state school officials and census men have a devil of a time. you can bet that prying strangers aint welcome around innsmouth. ive heard personally of moren one business or government man thats disappeared there, and theres loose talk of one who went crazy and is out at danvers now. they must have fixed up some awful scare for that fellow. thats why i wouldnt go at night if i was you. ive never been there and have no wish to go, but i guess a daytime trip couldnt hurt you even though the people hereabouts will advise you not to make it. if youre just sightseeing, and looking for oldtime stuff, innsmouth ought to be quite a place for you. and so i spent part of that evening at the newburyport public library looking up data about innsmouth. when i had tried to question the natives in the shops, the lunchroom, the garages, and the fire station, i had found them even harder to get started than the ticket agent had predicted; and realized that i could not spare the time to overcome their first instinctive reticence. they had a kind of obscure suspiciousness, as if there were something amiss with anyone too much interested in innsmouth. at the y. m. c. a., where i was stopping, the clerk merely discouraged my going to such a dismal, decadent place; and the people at the library shewed much the same attitude. clearly, in the eyes of the educated, innsmouth was merely an exaggerated case of civic degeneration. references to decline were few, though the significance of the later record was unmistakable. after the civil war all industrial life was confined to the marsh refining company, and the marketing of gold ingots formed the only remaining bit of major commerce aside from the eternal fishing. that fishing paid less and less as the price of the commodity fell and largescale corporations offered competition, but there was never a dearth of fish around innsmouth harbour. foreigners seldom settled there, and there was some discreetly veiled evidence that a number of poles and portuguese who had tried it had been scattered in a peculiarly drastic fashion. most interesting of all was a glancing reference to the strange jewelry vaguely associated with innsmouth. it had evidently impressed the whole countryside more than a little, for mention was made of specimens in the museum of miskatonic university at arkham, and in the display room of the newburyport historical society. the fragmentary descriptions of these things were bald and prosaic, but they hinted to me an undercurrent of persistent strangeness. something about them seemed so odd and provocative that i could not put them out of my mind, and despite the relative lateness of the hour i resolved to see the local sample said to be a large, queerlyproportioned thing evidently meant for a tiara if it could possibly be arranged. the librarian gave me a note of introduction to the curator of the society, a miss anna tilton, who lived nearby, and after a brief explanation that ancient gentlewoman was kind enough to pilot me into the closed building, since the hour was not outrageously late. the collection was a notable one indeed, but in my present mood i had eyes for nothing but the bizarre object which glistened in a corner cupboard under the electric lights. it took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make me literally gasp at the strange, unearthly splendour of the alien, opulent phantasy that rested there on a purple velvet cushion. even now i can hardly describe what i saw, though it was clearly enough a sort of tiara, as the description had said. it was tall in front, and with a very large and curiously irregular periphery, as if designed for a head of almost freakishly elliptical outline. the material seemed to be predominantly gold, though a weird lighter lustrousness hinted at some strange alloy with an equally beautiful and scarcely identifiable metal. its condition was almost perfect, and one could have spent hours in studying the striking and puzzlingly untraditional designs some simply geometrical, and some plainly marine chased or moulded in high relief on its surface with a craftsmanship of incredible skill and grace. the longer i looked, the more the thing fascinated me; and in this fascination there was a curiously disturbing element hardly to be classified or accounted for. at first i decided that it was the queer otherworldly quality of the art which made me uneasy. all other art objects i had ever seen either belonged to some known racial or national stream, or else were consciously modernistic defiances of every recognized stream. this tiara was neither. it clearly belonged to some settled technique of infinite maturity and perfection, yet that technique was utterly remote from any eastern or western, ancient or modern which i had ever heard of or seen exemplified. it was as if the workmanship were that of another planet. however, i soon saw that my uneasiness had a second and perhaps equally potent source residing in the pictorial and mathematical suggestion of the strange designs. the patterns all hinted of remote secrets and unimaginable abysses in time and space, and the monotonously aquatic nature of the reliefs became almost sinister. among these reliefs were fabulous monsters of abhorrent grotesqueness and malignity half ichthyic and half batrachian in suggestion which one could not dissociate from a certain haunting and uncomfortable sense of pseudomemory, as if they called up some image from deep cells and tissues whose retentive functions are wholly primal and awesomely ancestral. at times i fancied that every contour of these blasphemous fishfrogs was overflowing with the ultimate quintessence of unknown and inhuman evil. miss tilton, comparing all possible hypotheses regarding its origin and its presence in new england, was inclined to believe that it formed part of some exotic pirate hoard discovered by old captain obed marsh. this view was surely not weakened by the insistent offers of purchase at a high price which the marshes began to make as soon as they knew of its presence, and which they repeated to this day despite the societys unvarying determination not to sell. as the good lady shewed me out of the building she made it clear that the pirate theory of the marsh fortune was a popular one among the intelligent people of the region. her own attitude toward shadowed innsmouth which she never seen was one of disgust at a community slipping far down the cultural scale, and she assured me that the rumours of devilworship were partly justified by a peculiar secret cult which had gained force there and engulfed all the orthodox churches. it was called, she said, the esoteric order of dagon, and was undoubtedly a debased, quasipagan thing imported from the east a century before, at a time when the innsmouth fisheries seemed to be going barren. its persistence among a simple people was quite natural in view of the sudden and permanent return of abundantly fine fishing, and it soon came to be the greatest influence in the town, replacing freemasonry altogether and taking up headquarters in the old masonic hall on new church green. all this, to the pious miss tilton, formed an excellent reason for shunning the ancient town of decay and desolation; but to me it was merely a fresh incentive. to my architectural and historical anticipations was now added an acute anthropological zeal, and i could scarcely sleep in my small room at the y as the night wore away. ii shortly before ten the next morning i stood with one small valise in front of hammonds drug store in old market square waiting for the innsmouth bus. as the hour for its arrival drew near i noticed a general drift of the loungers to other places up the street, or to the ideal lunch across the square. evidently the ticketagent had not exaggerated the dislike which local people bore toward innsmouth and its denizens. in a few moments a small motorcoach of extreme decrepitude and dirty grey colour rattled down state street, made a turn, and drew up at the curb beside me. i felt immediately that it was the right one; a guess which the halfillegible sign on the windshield arkhaminnsmouthnewburyport soon verified. there were only three passengers dark, unkempt men of sullen visage and somewhat youthful cast and when the vehicle stopped they clumsily shambled out and began walking up state street in a silent, almost furtive fashion. the driver also alighted, and i watched him as he went into the drug store to make some purchase. this, i reflected, must be the joe sargent mentioned by the ticketagent; and even before i noticed any details there spread over me a wave of spontaneous aversion which could be neither checked nor explained. it suddenly struck me as very natural that the local people should not wish to ride on a bus owned and driven by this man, or to visit any oftener than possible the habitat of such a man and his kinsfolk. when the driver came out of the store i looked at him more carefully and tried to determine the source of my evil impression. he was a thin, stoopshouldered man not much under six feet tall, dressed in shabby blue civilian clothes and wearing a frayed golf cap. his age was perhaps thirtyfive, but the odd, deep creases in the sides of his neck made him seem older when one did not study his dull, expressionless face. he had a narrow head, bulging, wateryblue eyes that seemed never to wink, a flat nose, a receding forehead and chin, and singularly undeveloped ears. his long thick lip and coarsepored, greyish cheeks seemed almost beardless except for some sparse yellow hairs that straggled and curled in irregular patches; and in places the surface seemed queerly irregular, as if peeling from some cutaneous disease. his hands were large and heavily veined, and had a very unusual greyishblue tinge. the fingers were strikingly short in proportion to the rest of the structure, and seemed to have a tendency to curl closely into the huge palm. as he walked toward the bus i observed his peculiarly shambling gait and saw that his feet were inordinately immense. the more i studied them the more i wondered how he could buy any shoes to fit them. a certain greasiness about the fellow increased my dislike. he was evidently given to working or lounging around the fish docks, and carried with him much of their characteristic smell. just what foreign blood was in him i could not even guess. his oddities certainly did not look asiatic, polynesian, levantine or negroid, yet i could see why the people found him alien. i myself would have thought of biological degeneration rather than alienage. i was sorry when i saw there would be no other passengers on the bus. somehow i did not like the idea of riding alone with this driver. but as leaving time obviously approached i conquered my qualms and followed the man aboard, extending him a dollar bill and murmuring the single word innsmouth. he looked curiously at me for a second as he returned forty cents change without speaking. i took a seat far behind him, but on the same side of the bus, since i wished to watch the shore during the journey. at length the decrepit vehicle stared with a jerk, and rattled noisily past the old brick buildings of state street amidst a cloud of vapour from the exhaust. glancing at the people on the sidewalks, i thought i detected in them a curious wish to avoid looking at the bus or at least a wish to avoid seeming to look at it. then we turned to the left into high street, where the going was smoother; flying by stately old mansions of the early republic and still older colonial farmhouses, passing the lower green and parker river, and finally emerging into a long, monotonous stretch of open shore country. the day was warm and sunny, but the landscape of sand and sedgegrass, and stunted shrubbery became more and desolate as we proceeded. out the window i could see the blue water and the sandy line of plum island, and we presently drew very near the beach as our narrow road veered off from the main highway to rowley and ipswich. there were no visible houses, and i could tell by the state of the road that traffic was very light hereabouts. the weatherworn telephone poles carried only two wires. now and then we crossed crude wooden bridges over tidal creeks that wound far inland and promoted the general isolation of the region. at last we lost sight of plum island and saw the vast expanse of the open atlantic on our left. our narrow course began to climb steeply, and i felt a singular sense of disquiet in looking at the lonely crest ahead where the rutted roadway met the sky. it was as if the bus were about to keep on in its ascent, leaving the sane earth altogether and merging with the unknown arcana of upper air and cryptical sky. the smell of the sea took on ominous implications, and the silent drivers bent, rigid back and narrow head became more and more hateful. as i looked at him i saw that the back of his head was almost as hairless as his face, having only a few straggling yellow strands upon a grey scabrous surface. then we reached the crest and beheld the outspread valley beyond, where the manuxet joins the sea just north of the long line of cliffs that culminate in kingsport head and veer off toward cape ann. on the far misty horizon i could just make out the dizzy profile of the head, topped by the queer ancient house of which so many legends are told; but for the moment all my attention was captured by the nearer panorama just below me. i had, i realized, come face to face with rumourshadowed innsmouth. it was a town of wide extent and dense construction, yet one with a portentous dearth of visible life. from the tangle of chimneypots scarcely a wisp of smoke came, and the three tall steeples loomed stark and unpainted against the seaward horizon. one of them was crumbling down at the top, and in that and another there were only black gaping holes where clockdials should have been. the vast huddle of sagging gambrel roofs and peaked gables conveyed with offensive clearness the idea of wormy decay, and as we approached along the now descending road i could see that many roofs had wholly caved in. there were some large square georgian houses, too, with hipped roofs, cupolas, and railed widows walks. these were mostly well back from the water, and one or two seemed to be in moderately sound condition. stretching inland from among them i saw the rusted, grassgrown line of the abandoned railway, with leaning telegraphpoles now devoid of wires, and the halfobscured lines of the old carriage roads to rowley and ipswich. the decay was worst close to the waterfront, though in its very midst i could spy the white belfry of a fairly well preserved brick structure which looked like a small factory. the harbour, long clogged with sand, was enclosed by an ancient stone breakwater; on which i could begin to discern the minute forms of a few seated fishermen, and at whose end were what looked like the foundations of a bygone lighthouse. a sandy tongue had formed inside this barrier and upon it i saw a few decrepit cabins, moored dories, and scattered lobsterpots. the only deep water seemed to be where the river poured out past the belfried structure and turned southward to join the ocean at the breakwaters end. here and there the ruins of wharves jutted out from the shore to end in indeterminate rottenness, those farthest south seeming the most decayed. and far out at sea, despite a high tide, i glimpsed a long, black line scarcely rising above the water yet carrying a suggestion of odd latent malignancy. this, i knew, must be devil reef. as i looked, a subtle, curious sense of beckoning seemed superadded to the grim repulsion; and oddly enough, i found this overtone more disturbing than the primary impression. we met no one on the road, but presently began to pass deserted farms in varying stages of ruin. then i noticed a few inhabited houses with rags stuffed in the broken windows and shells and dead fish lying about the littered yards. once or twice i saw listlesslooking people working in barren gardens or digging clams on the fishysmelling beach below, and groups of dirty, simianvisaged children playing around weedgrown doorsteps. somehow these people seemed more disquieting than the dismal buildings, for almost every one had certain peculiarities of face and motions which i instinctively disliked without being able to define or comprehend them. for a second i thought this typical physique suggested some picture i had seen, perhaps in a book, under circumstances of particular horror or melancholy; but this pseudorecollection passed very quickly. as the bus reached a lower level i began to catch the steady note of a waterfall through the unnatural stillness, the leaning, unpainted houses grew thicker, lined both sides of the road, and displayed more urban tendencies than did those we were leaving behind, the panorama ahead had contracted to a street scene, and in spots i could see where a cobblestone pavement and stretches of brick sidewalk had formerly existed. all the houses were apparently deserted, and there were occasional gaps where tumbledown chimneys and cellar walls told of buildings that had collapsed. pervading everything was the most nauseous fishy odour imaginable. but i was not to reach my destination without one very strong impression of poignantly disagreeable quality. the bus had come to a sort of open concourse or radial point with churches on two sides and the bedraggled remains of a circular green in the centre, and i was looking at a large pillared hall on the righthand junction ahead. the structures once white paint was now gray and peeling and the black and gold sign on the pediment was so faded that i could only with difficulty make out the words esoteric order of dagon. this, then was the former masonic hall now given over to a degraded cult. as i strained to decipher this inscription my notice was distracted by the raucous tones of a cracked bell across the street, and i quickly turned to look out the window on my side of the coach. the sound came from a squat stone church of manifestly later date than most of the houses, built in a clumsy gothic fashion and having a disproportionately high basement with shuttered windows. though the hands of its clock were missing on the side i glimpsed, i knew that those hoarse strokes were tolling the hour of eleven. then suddenly all thoughts of time were blotted out by an onrushing image of sharp intensity and unaccountable horror which had seized me before i knew what it really was. the door of the church basement was open, revealing a rectangle of blackness inside. and as i looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross that dark rectangle; burning into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was all the more maddening because analysis could not shew a single nightmarish quality in it. it was a living object the first except the driver that i had seen since entering the compact part of the town and had i been in a steadier mood i would have found nothing whatever of terror in it. clearly, as i realised a moment later, it was the pastor; clad in some peculiar vestments doubtless introduced since the order of dagon had modified the ritual of the local churches. the thing which had probably caught my first subconscious glance and supplied the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore; an almost exact duplicate of the one miss tilton had shown me the previous evening. this, acting on my imagination, had supplied namelessly sinister qualities to the indeterminate face and robed, shambling form beneath it. there was not, i soon decided, any reason why i should have felt that shuddering touch of evil pseudomemory. was it not natural that a local mystery cult should adopt among its regimentals an unique type of headdress made familiar to the community in some strange way perhaps as treasuretrove? a very thin sprinkling of repellentlooking youngish people now became visible on the sidewalks lone individuals, and silent knots of two or three. the lower floors of the crumbling houses sometimes harboured small shops with dingy signs, and i noticed a parked truck or two as we rattled along. the sound of waterfalls became more and more distinct, and presently i saw a fairly deep rivergorge ahead, spanned by a wide, ironrailed highway bridge beyond which a large square opened out. as we clanked over the bridge i looked out on both sides and observed some factory buildings on the edge of the grassy bluff or part way down. the water far below was very abundant, and i could see two vigorous sets of falls upstream on my right and at least one downstream on my left. from this point the noise was quite deafening. then we rolled into the large semicircular square across the river and drew up on the righthand side in front of a tall, cupola crowned building with remnants of yellow paint and with a halfeffaced sign proclaiming it to be the gilman house. i was glad to get out of that bus, and at once proceeded to check my valise in the shabby hotel lobby. there was only one person in sight an elderly man without what i had come to call the innsmouth look and i decided not to ask him any of the questions which bothered me; remembering that odd things had been noticed in this hotel. instead, i strolled out on the square, from which the bus had already gone, and studied the scene minutely and appraisingly. for some reason or other i chose to make my first inquiries at the chain grocery, whose personnel was not likely to be native to innsmouth. i found a solitary boy of about seventeen in charge, and was pleased to note the brightness and affability which promised cheerful information. he seemed exceptionally eager to talk, and i soon gathered that he did not like the place, its fishy smell, or its furtive people. a word with any outsider was a relief to him. he hailed from arkham, boarded with a family who came from ipswich, and went back whenever he got a moment off. his family did not like him to work in innsmouth, but the chain had transferred him there and he did not wish to give up his job. there was, he said, no public library or chamber of commerce in innsmouth, but i could probably find my way about. the street i had come down was federal. west of that were the fine old residence streets broad, washington, lafayette, and adams and east of it were the shoreward slums. it was in these slums along main street that i would find the old georgian churches, but they were all long abandoned. it would be well not to make oneself too conspicuous in such neighbourhoods especially north of the river since the people were sullen and hostile. some strangers had even disappeared. certain spots were almost forbidden territory, as he had learned at considerable cost. one must not, for example, linger much around the marsh refinery, or around any of the still used churches, or around the pillared order of dagon hall at new church green. those churches were very odd all violently disavowed by their respective denominations elsewhere, and apparently using the queerest kind of ceremonials and clerical vestments. their creeds were heterodox and mysterious, involving hints of certain marvelous transformations leading to bodily immorality of a sort on this earth. the youths own pastor dr. wallace of asbury m. e. church in arkham had gravely urged him not to join any church in innsmouth. they were very fond of the water, and swam a great deal in both river and harbour. swimming races out to devil reef were very common, and everyone in sight seemed well able to share in this arduous sport. when one came to think of it, it was generally only rather young people who were seen about in public, and of these the oldest were apt to be the most taintedlooking. when exceptions did occur, they were mostly persons with no trace of aberrancy, like the old clerk at the hotel. one wondered what became of the bulk of the older folk, and whether the innsmouth look were not a strange and insidious diseasephenomenon which increased its hold as years advanced. only a very rare affliction, of course, could bring about such vast and radical anatomical changes in a single individual after maturity changes invoking osseous factors as basic as the shape of the skull but then, even this aspect was no more baffling and unheardof than the visible features of the malady as a whole. it would be hard, the youth implied, to form any real conclusions regarding such a matter; since one never came to know the natives personally no matter how long one might live in innsmouth. the youth was certain that many specimens even worse than the worst visible ones were kept locked indoors in some places. people sometimes heard the queerest kind of sounds. the tottering waterfront hovels north of the river were reputedly connected by hidden tunnels, being thus a veritable warren of unseen abnormalities. what kind of foreign blood if any these beings had, it was impossible to tell. they sometimes kept certain especially repulsive characters out of sight when government and others from the outside world came to town. after all, though, little useful data could be gained from him; since his stories were all insane, incomplete hints of impossible marvels and horrors which could have no source save in his own disordered fancy. nobody ever believed him, but the natives did not like him to drink and talk with strangers; and it was not always safe to be seen questioning him. it was probably from him that some of the wildest popular whispers and delusions were derived. several nonnative residents had reported monstrous glimpses from time to time, but between old zadoks tales and the malformed inhabitants it was no wonder such illusions were current. none of the nonnatives ever stayed out late at night, there being a widespread impression that it was not wise to do so. besides, the streets were loathsomely dark. as for business the abundance of fish was certainly almost uncanny, but the natives were taking less and less advantage of it. moreover, prices were falling and competition was growing. of course the towns real business was the refinery, whose commercial office was on the square only a few doors east of where we stood. old man marsh was never seen, but sometimes went to the works in a closed, curtained car. there were all sorts of rumors about how marsh had come to look. he had once been a great dandy; and people said he still wore the frockcoated finery of the edwardian age curiously adapted to certain deformities. his son had formerly conducted the office in the square, but latterly they had been keeping out of sight a good deal and leaving the brunt of affairs to the younger generation. the sons and their sisters had come to look very queer, especially the elder ones; and it was said that their health was failing. one of the marsh daughters was a repellent, reptilianlooking woman who wore an excess of weird jewellery clearly of the same exotic tradition as that to which the strange tiara belonged. my informant had noticed it many times, and had heard it spoken of as coming from some secret hoard, either of pirates or of demons. the clergymen or priests, or whatever they were called nowadays also wore this kind of ornament as a headdress; but one seldom caught glimpses of them. other specimens the youth had not seen, though many were rumoured to exist around innsmouth. the marshes, together with the other three gently bred families of the town the waites, the gilmans, and the eliots were all very retiring. they lived in immense houses along washington street, and several were reputed to harbour in concealment certain living kinsfolk whose personal aspect forbade public view, and whose deaths had been reported and recorded. warning me that many of the street signs were down, the youth drew for my benefit a rough but ample and painstaking sketch map of the towns salient features. after a moments study i felt sure that it would be of great help, and pocketed it with profuse thanks. disliking the dinginess of the single restaurant i had seen, i bought a fair supply of cheese crackers and ginger wafers to serve as a lunch later on. my program, i decided, would be to thread the principal streets, talk with any nonnatives i might encounter, and catch the eight oclock coach for arkham. the town, i could see, formed a significant and exaggerated example of communal decay; but being no sociologist i would limit my serious observations to the field of architecture. thus i began my systematic though halfbewildered tour of innsmouths narrow, shadowblighted ways. crossing the bridge and turning toward the roar of the lower falls, i passed close to the marsh refinery, which seemed to be oddly free from the noise of industry. the building stood on the steep river bluff near a bridge and an open confluence of streets which i took to be the earliest civic center, displaced after the revolution by the present town square. recrossing the gorge on the main street bridge, i struck a region of utter desertion which somehow made me shudder. collapsing huddles of gambrel roofs formed a jagged and fantastic skyline, above which rose the ghoulish, decapitated steeple of an ancient church. some houses along main street were tenanted, but most were tightly boarded up. down unpaved side streets i saw the black, gaping windows of deserted hovels, many of which leaned at perilous and incredible angles through the sinking of part of the foundations. those windows stared so spectrally that it took courage to turn eastward toward the waterfront. certainly, the terror of a deserted house swells in geometrical rather than arithmetical progression as houses multiply to form a city of stark desolation. the sight of such endless avenues of fishyeyed vacancy and death, and the thought of such linked infinities of black, brooding compartments given over to cobwebs and memories and the conqueror worm, start up vestigial fears and aversions that not even the stoutest philosophy can disperse. fish street was as deserted as main, though it differed in having many brick and stone warehouses still in excellent shape. water street was almost its duplicate, save that there were great seaward gaps where wharves had been. not a living thing did i see except for the scattered fishermen on the distant breakwater, and not a sound did i hear save the lapping of the harbour tides and the roar of the falls in the manuxet. the town was getting more and more on my nerves, and i looked behind me furtively as i picked my way back over the tottering water street bridge. the fish street bridge, according to the sketch, was in ruins. north of the river there were traces of squalid life active fishpacking houses in water street, smoking chimneys and patched roofs here and there, occasional sounds from indeterminate sources, and infrequent shambling forms in the dismal streets and unpaved lanes but i seemed to find this even more oppressive than the southerly desertion. for one thing, the people were more hideous and abnormal than those near the centre of the town; so that i was several times evilly reminded of something utterly fantastic which i could not quite place. undoubtedly the alien strain in the innsmouth folk was stronger here than farther inland unless, indeed, the innsmouth look were a disease rather than a blood stain, in which case this district might be held to harbour the more advanced cases. one detail that annoyed me was the distribution of the few faint sounds i heard. they ought naturally to have come wholly from the visibly inhabited houses, yet in reality were often strongest inside the most rigidly boardedup facades. there were creakings, scurryings, and hoarse doubtful noises; and i thought uncomfortably about the hidden tunnels suggested by the grocery boy. suddenly i found myself wondering what the voices of those denizens would be like. i had heard no speech so far in this quarter, and was unaccountably anxious not to do so. pausing only long enough to look at two fine but ruinous old churches at main and church streets, i hastened out of that vile waterfront slum. my next logical goal was new church green, but somehow or other i could not bear to repass the church in whose basement i had glimpsed the inexplicably frightening form of that strangely diademmed priest or pastor. besides, the grocery youth had told me that churches, as well as the order of dagon hall, were not advisable neighbourhoods for strangers. accordingly i kept north along main to martin, then turning inland, crossing federal street safely north of the green, and entering the decayed patrician neighbourhood of northern broad, washington, lafayette, and adams streets. though these stately old avenues were illsurfaced and unkempt, their elmshaded dignity had not entirely departed. mansion after mansion claimed my gaze, most of them decrepit and boarded up amidst neglected grounds, but one or two in each street shewing signs of occupancy. in washington street there was a row of four or five in excellent repair and with finelytended lawns and gardens. the most sumptuous of these with wide terraced parterres extending back the whole way to lafayette street i took to be the home of old man marsh, the afflicted refinery owner. in all these streets no living thing was visible, and i wondered at the complete absence of cats and dogs from innsmouth. another thing which puzzled and disturbed me, even in some of the bestpreserved mansions, was the tightly shuttered condition of many thirdstory and attic windows. furtiveness and secretiveness seemed universal in this hushed city of alienage and death, and i could not escape the sensation of being watched from ambush on every hand by sly, staring eyes that never shut. i shivered as the cracked stroke of three sounded from a belfry on my left. too well did i recall the squat church from which those notes came. following washington street toward the river, i now faced a new zone of former industry and commerce; noting the ruins of a factory ahead, and seeing others, with the traces of an old railway station and covered railway bridge beyond, up the gorge on my right. the uncertain bridge now before me was posted with a warning sign, but i took the risk and crossed again to the south bank where traces of life reappeared. furtive, shambling creatures stared cryptically in my direction, and more normal faces eyed me coldly and curiously. innsmouth was rapidly becoming intolerable, and i turned down paine street toward the square in the hope of getting some vehicle to take me to arkham before the stilldistant startingtime of that sinister bus. it was then that i saw the tumbledown fire station on my left, and noticed the red faced, bushybearded, watery eyed old man in nondescript rags who sat on a bench in front of it talking with a pair of unkempt but not abnormal looking firemen. this, of course, must be zadok allen, the halfcrazed, liquorish nonagenarian whose tales of old innsmouth and its shadow were so hideous and incredible. iii it must have been some imp of the perverse or some sardonic pull from dark, hidden sources which made me change my plans as i did. i had long before resolved to limit my observations to architecture alone, and i was even then hurrying toward the square in an effort to get quick transportation out of this festering city of death and decay; but the sight of old zadok allen set up new currents in my mind and made me slacken my pace uncertainly. i had been assured that the old man could do nothing but hint at wild, disjointed, and incredible legends, and i had been warned that the natives made it unsafe to be seen talking with him; yet the thought of this aged witness to the towns decay, with memories going back to the early days of ships and factories, was a lure that no amount of reason could make me resist. after all, the strangest and maddest of myths are often merely symbols or allegories based upon truth and old zadok must have seen everything which went on around innsmouth for the last ninety years. curiosity flared up beyond sense and caution, and in my youthful egotism i fancied i might be able to sift a nucleus of real history from the confused, extravagant outpouring i would probably extract with the aid of raw whiskey. i knew that i could not accost him then and there, for the firemen would surely notice and object. instead, i reflected, i would prepare by getting some bootleg liquor at a place where the grocery boy had told me it was plentiful. then i would loaf near the fire station in apparent casualness, and fall in with old zadok after he had started on one of his frequent rambles. the youth had said that he was very restless, seldom sitting around the station for more than an hour or two at a time. a quart bottle of whiskey was easily, though not cheaply, obtained in the rear of a dingy varietystore just off the square in eliot street. the dirtylooking fellow who waited on me had a touch of the staring innsmouth look, but was quite civil in his way; being perhaps used to the custom of such convivial strangers truckmen, goldbuyers, and the like as were occasionally in town. reentering the square i saw that luck was with me; for shuffling out of paine street around the corner of the gilman house i glimpsed nothing less than the tall, lean, tattered form of old zadok allen himself. in accordance with my plan, i attracted his attention by brandishing my newlypurchased bottle: and soon realised that he had begun to shuffle wistfully after me as i turned into waite street on my way to the most deserted region i could think of. i was steering my course by the map the grocery boy had prepared, and was aiming for the wholly abandoned stretch of southern waterfront which i had previously visited. the only people in sight there had been the fishermen on the distant breakwater; and by going a few squares south i could get beyond the range of these, finding a pair of seats on some abandoned wharf and being free to question old zadok unobserved for an indefinite time. before i reached main street i could hear a faint and wheezy hey, mister! behind me and i presently allowed the old man to catch up and take copious pulls from the quart bottle. i began putting out feelers as we walked amidst the omnipresent desolation and crazily tilted ruins, but found that the aged tongue did not loosen as quickly as i had expected. at length i saw a grassgrown opening toward the sea between crumbling brick walls, with the weedy length of an earthandmasonry wharf projecting beyond. piles of mosscovered stones near the water promised tolerable seats, and the scene was sheltered from all possible view by a ruined warehouse on the north. here, i thought was the ideal place for a long secret colloquy; so i guided my companion down the lane and picked out spots to sit in among the mossy stones. the air of death and desertion was ghoulish, and the smell of fish almost insufferable; but i was resolved to let nothing deter me. about four hours remained for conversation if i were to catch the eight oclock coach for arkham, and i began to dole out more liquor to the ancient tippler; meanwhile eating my own frugal lunch. in my donations i was careful not to overshoot the mark, for i did not wish zadoks vinous garrulousness to pass into a stupor. after an hour his furtive taciturnity shewed signs of disappearing, but much to my disappointment he still sidetracked my questions about innsmouth and its shadowhaunted past. he would babble of current topics, revealing a wide acquaintance with newspapers and a great tendency to philosophise in a sententious village fashion. toward the end of the second hour i feared my quart of whiskey would not be enough to produce results, and was wondering whether i had better leave old zadok and go back for more. just then, however, chance made the opening which my questions had been unable to make; and the wheezing ancients rambling took a turn that caused me to lean forward and listen alertly. my back was toward the fishysmelling sea, but he was facing it and something or other had caused his wandering gaze to light on the low, distant line of devil reef, then showing plainly and almost fascinatingly above the waves. the sight seemed to displease him, for he began a series of weak curses which ended in a confidential whisper and a knowing leer. he bent toward me, took hold of my coat lapel, and hissed out some hints that could not be mistaken, thars whar it all begun that cursed place of all wickedness whar the deep water starts. gate o hell sheer drop daown to a bottom no saoundinline kin tech. ol capn obed done it him that faound aout moren was good fer him in the saouth sea islands. never was nobody like capn obed old limb o satan! heh, heh! i kin mind him atellin abaout furren parts, an callin all the folks stupid for goin to christian meetin an bearin their burdns meek an lowly. says theyd orter git better gods like some o the folks in the injies gods as ud bring em good fishin in return for their sacrifices, an ud reely answer folkss prayers. matt eliot his fust mate, talked a lot too, only he was again folkss doin any heathen things. told abaout an island east of othaheite whar they was a lot o stone ruins oldern anybody knew anying abaout, kind o like them on ponape, in the carolines, but with carvens of faces that looked like the big statues on easter island. thar was a little volcanic island near thar, too, whar they was other ruins with diffrent carvin ruins all wore away like theyd ben under the sea onct, an with picters of awful monsters all over em. wal, sir, matt he says the natives anound thar had all the fish they cud ketch, an sported bracelets an armlets an head rigs made aout o a queer kind o gold an covered with picters o monsters jest like the ones carved over the ruins on the little island sorter fishlike frogs or froglike fishes that was drawed in all kinds o positions likes they was human beins. nobody cud get aout o them whar they got all the stuff, an all the other natives wondered haow they managed to find fish in plenty even when the very next island had lean pickins. matt he got to wonderon too an so did capn obed. obed he notices, besides, that lots of the hnsome young folks ud drop aout o sight fer good from year to year, an that they want many old folks around. also, he thinks some of the folks looked dinned queer even for kanakys. it took obed to git the truth aout o them heathen. i dunt know haow he done it, but be begun by tradin fer the goldlike things they wore. ast em whar they come from, an ef they cud git more, an finally wormed the story aout o the old chief walakea, they called him. nobody but obed ud ever a believed the old yeller devil, but the capn cud read folks like they was books. heh, heh! nobody never believes me naow when i tell em, an i dunt spose you will, young feller though come to look at ye, ye hev kind o got them sharpreadin eyes like obed had. the old mans whisper grew fainter, and i found myself shuddering at the terrible and sincere portentousness of his intonation, even though i knew his tale could be nothing but drunken phantasy. wal, sir, obed he lart that theys things on this arth as most folks never heerd about an wouldnt believe ef they did hear. lt seems these kanakys was sacrificin heaps o their young men an maidens to some kind o godthings that lived under the sea, an gittin all kinds o favour in return. they met the things on the little islet with the queer ruins, an it seems them awful picters o frogfish monsters was supposed to be picters o these things. mebbe they was the kind o critters as got all the mermaid stories an sech started. they had all kinds a cities on the seabottom, an this island was heaved up from thar. seem they was some of the things alive in the stone buildins when the island come up sudden to the surface, thats how the kanakys got wind they was daown thar. made signtalk as soon as they got over bein skeert, an pieced up a bargain afore long. them things liked human sacrifices. had had em ages afore, but lost track o the upper world after a time. what they done to the victims it aint fer me to say, an i guess obed wasnt none too sharp abaout askin. but it was all right with the heathens, because theyd ben havin a hard time an was desprate abaout everything. they give a sarten number o young folks to the seathings twice every year mayeve an hallaween reglar as cud be. also give some a the carved knickknacks they made. what the things agreed to give in return was plenty a fish they druv em in from all over the sea an a few gold like things naow an then. wal, as i says, the natives met the things on the little volcanic islet goin thar in canoes with the sacrifices et cetry, and bringin back any of the goldlike jools as was comin to em. at fust the things didnt never go onto the main island, but arter a time they come to want to. seems they hankered arter mixin with the folks, an havin jint ceremonies on the big days mayeve an halloween. ye see, they was able to live both in ant aout o water what they call amphibians, i guess. the kanakys told em as haow folks from the other islands might wanta wipe an out if they got wind o their bein thar, but they says they dunt keer much, because they cud wipe aout the hull brood o humans ef they was willin to bother that is, any as didnt be, sarten signs sech as was used onct by the lost old ones, whoever they was. but not wantin to bother, theyd lay low when anybody visited the island. when it come to matin with them toadlookin fishes, the kanakys kind o balked, but finally they larnt something as put a new face on the matter. seems that human folks has got a kind a relation to sech waterbeasts that everything alive come aout o the water onct an only needs a little change to go back agin. them things told the kanakys that ef they mixed bloods thered be children as ud look human at fust, but later turn moren more like the things, till finally theyd take to the water an jine the main lot o things daown har. an this is the important part, young feller them as turned into fish things an went into the water wouldnt never die. them things never died excep they was kilt violent. wal, sir, it seems by the time obed knowed them islanders they was all full o fish blood from them deep water things. when they got old an begun to shew it, they was kep hid until they felt like takin to the water an quittin the place. some was more teched than others, an some never did change quite enough to take to the water; but mosily they turned out jest the way them things said. them as was born more like the things changed arly, but them as was nearly human sometimes stayed on the island till they was past seventy, though theyd usually go daown under for trial trips afore that. folks as had took to the water genrally come back a good deal to visit, sos a man ud often be atalkin to his own fivetimesgreatgrandfather whod left the dry land a couple o hundred years or so afore. everybody got aout o the idee o dyin excep in canoe wars with the other islanders, or as sacrifices to the seagods daown below, or from snakebite or plague or sharp gallopin ailments or somethin afore they cud take to the water but simply looked forrad to a kind o change that want a bit horrible artet a while. they thought what theyd got was well wuth all theyd had to give up an i guess obed kind o come to think the same hisself when hed chewed over old walakeas story a bit. walakea, though, was one of the few as hadnt got none of the fish blood bein of a royal line that intermarried with royal lines on other islands. walakea he shewed obed a lot o rites an incantations as had to do with the sea things, an let him see some o the folks in the village as had changed a lot from human shape. somehaow or other, though, he never would let him see one of the reglar things from right aout o the water. in the end he give him a funny kind o thingumajig made aout o lead or something, that he said ud bring up the fish things from any place in the water whar they might be a nest o em. the idee was to drop it daown with the right kind o prayers an sech. walakea allowed as the things was scattered all over the world, sos anybody that looked abaout cud find a nest an bring em up ef they was wanted. matt he didnt like this business at all, an wanted obed shud keep away from the island; but the capn was sharp fer gain, an faound he cud get them goldlike things so cheap it ud pay him to make a specialty of them. things went on that way for years an obed got enough o that goldlike stuff to make him start the refinery in waites old rundaown fullin mill. he didnt dass sell the pieces like they was, for folks ud be all the time askin questions. all the same his crews ud get a piece an dispose of it naow and then, even though they was swore to keep quiet; an he let his womenfolks wear some o the pieces as was more humanlike than most. well, come abaout thuttyeight when i was seven year old obed he faound the island people all wiped aout between vyages. seems the other islanders had got wind o what was goin on, and had took matters into their own hands. spose they must a had, after all, them old magic signs as the sea things says was the only things they was afeard of. no tellin what any o them kanakys will chance to git a holt of when the seabottom throws up some island with ruins oldern the deluge. pious cusses, these was they didnt leave nothin standin on either the main island or the little volcanic islet excep what parts of the ruins was too big to knock daown. in some places they was little stones strewed abaout like charms with somethin on em like what ye call a swastika naowadays. probly them was the old ones signs. folks all wiped aout no trace o no goldlike things an none the nearby kanakys ud breathe a word abaout the matter. wouldnt even admit theyd ever ben any people on that island. that naturally hit obed pretty hard, seein as his normal trade was doin very poor. it hit the whole of innsmouth, too, because in seafarint days what profited the master of a ship genlly profited the crew proportionate. most of the folks araound the taown took the hard times kind o sheeplike an resigned, but they was in bad shape because the fishin was peterin aout an the mills want doin none too well. here the old man faltered, mumbled, and lapsed into a moody and apprehensive silence; glancing nervously over his shoulder and then turning back to stare fascinatedly at the distant black reef. when i spoke to him he did not answer, so i knew i would have to let him finish the bottle. the insane yarn i was hearing interested me profoundly, for i fancied there was contained within it a sort of crude allegory based upon the strangeness of innsmouth and elaborated by an imagination at once creative and full of scraps of exotic legend. not for a moment did i believe that the tale had any really substantial foundation; but none the less the account held a hint of genuine terror if only because it brought in references to strange jewels clearly akin to the malign tiara i had seen at newburyport. perhaps the ornaments had, after all, come from some strange island; and possibly the wild stories were lies of the bygone obed himself rather than of this antique toper. i handed zadok the bottle, and he drained it to the last drop. it was curious how he could stand so much whiskey, for not even a trace of thickness had come into his high, wheezy voice. he licked the nose of the bottle and slipped it into his pocket, then beginning to nod and whisper softly to himself. i bent close to catch any articulate words he might utter, and thought i saw a sardonic smile behind the stained bushy whiskers. yes he was really forming words, and i could grasp a fair proportion of them. he stopped again, and from the look in his watery blue eyes i feared he was close to a stupor after all. but when i gently shook his shoulder he turned on me with astonishing alertness and snapped out some more obscure phrases. dunt believe me, hey? hey, heh, heh then jest tell me, young feller, why capn obed an twenty odd other folks used to row aout to devil reef in the dead o night an chant things so laoud ye cud hear em all over taown when the wind was right? tell me that, hey? an tell me why obed was allus droppin heavy things daown into the deep water tother side o the reef whar the bottom shoots daown like a cliff lowern ye kin saound? tell me what he done with that funnyshaped lead thingumajig as walakea give him? hey, boy? an what did they all haowl on mayeve, an, agin the next halloween? an whyd the new church parsons fellers as used to he sailors wear them queer robes an cover theirselves with them goldlike things obed brung? hey? the watery blue eyes were almost savage and maniacal now, and the dirty white beard bristled electrically. old zadok probably saw me shrink back, for he began to cackle evilly. heh, heh, heh, heh! beginnin to see hey? mebbe yed like to a ben me in them days, when i seed things at night aout to sea from the cupalo top o my haouse. oh, i kin tell ye little pitchers hev big ears, an i want missin nothin o what was gossiped abaout capn obed an the folks aout to the reef! heh, heh, heh! haow abaout the night i took my pas ships glass up to the cupalo an seed the reef abristlin thick with shapes that dove off quick soons the moon riz? obed an the folks was in a dory, but them shapes dove off the far side into the deep water an never come up ... haowd ye like to be a little shaver alone up in a cupola awatchin shapes as want human shapes? ...heh? ... heh, heh, heh ... the old man was getting hysterical, and i began to shiver with a nameless alarm. he laid a gnarled claw on my shoulder, and it seemed to me that its shaking was not altogether that of mirth. spose one night ye seed somethin heavy heaved offen obeds dory beyond the reef and then learned next day a young feller was missin from home. hey! did anybody ever see hide or hair o hiram gilman agin. did they? an nick pierce, an luelly waite, an adoniram saouthwick, an henry garrison hey? heh, heh, heh, heh ... shapes talkin sign language with their hands ... them as had reel hands ... remember, i aint sayin obed was set on hevin things jest like they was on that kanaky isle. i dunt think he aimed at fust to do no mixin, nor raise no younguns to take to the water an turn into fishes with eternal life. he wanted them gold things, an was willin to pay heavy, an i guess the others was satisfied fer a while ... come in fortysix the taown done some lookin an thinkin fer itself. too many folks missin too much wild preachin at meetin of a sunday too much talk abaout that reef. i guess i done a bit by tellin selectman mowry what i see from the cupalo. they was a party one night as follered obeds craowd aout to the reef, an i heerd shots betwixt the dories. nex day obed and thuttytwo others was in gaol, with everybody awonderin jest what was afoot and jest what charge agin em cud he got to holt. god, ef anybodyd lookd ahead ... a couple o weeks later, when nothin had ben throwed into the sea fer thet long ... zadok was shewing sings of fright and exhaustion, and i let him keep silence for a while, though glancing apprehensively at my watch. the tide had turned and was coming in now, and the sound of the waves seemed to arouse him. i was glad of that tide, for at high water the fishy smell might not be so bad. again i strained to catch his whispers. that awful night ... i seed em. i was up in the cupalo ... hordes of em ... swarms of em ... all over the reef an swimmin up the harbour into the manuxet ... god, what happened in the streets of innsmouth that night ... they rattled our door, but pa wouldnt open ... then he clumb aout the kitchen winder with his musket to find selecman mowry an see what he cud do ... maounds o the dead an the dyin ... shots and screams ... shaoutin in ol squar an taown squar an new church green gaol throwed open ... proclamation ... treason ... called it the plague when folks come in an faoud haff our people missin ... nobody left but them as ud jine in with obed an them things or else keep quiet ... never heard o my pa no more... the old man was panting and perspiring profusely. his grip on my shoulder tightened. everything cleaned up in the mornin but they was traces ... obed he kinder takes charge an says things is goin to be changed ... othersll worship with us at meetintime, an sarten haouses hez got to entertin guests ... they wanted to mix like they done with the kanakys, an he for one didnt feel baound to stop em. far gone, was obed ... jest like a crazy man on the subjeck. he says they brung us fish an treasure, an shud hev what they hankered after ... nothin was to be diffrunt on the aoutsid; only we was to keep shy o strangers ef we knowed what was good fer us. we all hed to take the oath o dagon, an later on they was secon an third oaths that some o us took. them as ud help special, ud git special rewards gold an sech no use balkin, fer they was millions of em daown thar. theyd ruther not start risin an wipin aout humankind, but ef they was gave away an forced to, they cud do a lot toward jest that. we didnt hev them old charms to cut em off like folks in the saouth sea did, an them kanakys wudut never give away their secrets. old zadok was fast lapsing into stark raving, and i held my breath. poor old soul to what pitiful depths of hallucination had his liquor, plus his hatred of the decay, alienage, and disease around him, brought that fertile, imaginative brain? he began to moan now, and tears were coursing down his channelled checks into the depths of his beard. god, what i seen senct i was fifteen year old mene, mene, tekel, upharsin! the folks as was missin, and them as kilt theirselves them as told things in arkham or ipswich or sech places was all called crazy, like youre callin me right naow but god, what i seen theyd a kilt me long ago fer what i know, only id took the fust an secon oaths o dago offen obed, so was pertected unlessen a jury of em proved i told things knowin an delibrit ... but i wudnt take the third oath id a died ruthern take that it got wuss araound civil war time, when children born senct fortysix begun to grow up some em, that is. i was afeared never did no pryin arter that awful night, an never see one o them clost to in all my life. that is, never no fullblooded one. i went to the war, an ef id a had any guts or sense id a never come back, but settled away from here. but folks wrote me things want so bad. that, i spose, was because govmunt draft men was in taown arter sixtythree. arter the war it was jest as bad agin. people begun to fall off mills an shops shet daown shippin stopped an the harbour choked up railrud give up but they ... they never stopped swimmin in an aout o the river from that cursed reef o satan an more an more attic winders got aboarded up, an more an more noises was heerd in haouses as want sposed to hev nobody in em... folks aoutside hev their stories abaout us spose youve heerd a plenty on em, seein what questions ye ast stories abaout things theyve seed naow an then, an abaout that queer joolry as still comes in from somewhars an aint quite all melted up but nothin never gits defnite. nobodyll believe nothin. they call them goldlike things pirate loot, an allaow the innsmouth folks hez furren blood or is distempered or somethin. beside, them that lives here shoo off as many strangers as they kin, an encourage the rest not to git very curous, specially raound night time. beasts balk at the critters hosses wussn mules but when they got autos that was all right. in fortysix capn obed took a second wife that nobody in the taown never see some says he didnt want to, but was made to by them as hed called in had three children by her two as disappeared young, but one gal as looked like anybody else an was eddicated in europe. obed finally got her married off by a trick to an arkham feller as didnt suspect nothin. but nobody aoutsidell hav nothin to do with innsmouth folks naow. barnabas marsh that runs the refinry now is obeds grandson by his fust wife son of onesiphorus, his eldest son, but his mother was another o them as want never seen aoutdoors. right naow barnabas is abaout changed. cant shet his eyes no more, an is all aout o shape. they say he still wears clothes, but hell take to the water soon. mebbe hes tried it already they do sometimes go daown for little spells afore they go daown for good. aint ben seed abaout in public fer nigh on ten year. dunt know haow his poor wife kin feel she come from ipiwich, an they nigh lynched barnabas when he courted her fifty odd year ago. obed he died in seventyeight an all the next genration is gone naow the fust wifes children dead, and the rest ... god knows ... the sound of the incoming tide was now very insistent, and little by little it seemed to change the old mans mood from maudlin tearfulness to watchful fear. he would pause now and then to renew those nervous glances over his shoulder or out toward the reef, and despite the wild absurdity of his tale, i could not help beginning to share his apprehensiveness. zadok now grew shriller, seemed to be trying to whip up his courage with louder speech. zadok was really screaming now, and the mad frenzy of his voice disturbed me more than i care to own. curse ye, dunt set thar astarin at me with them eyes i tell obed marsh hes in hell, an, hez got to stay thar! heh, heh ... in hell, i says! cant git me i haint done nothin nor told nobody nothin oh, you, young feller? wal, even ef i haint told nobody nothin yet, im agoin to naow! yew jest set still an listen to me, boy this is what i aint never told nobody... i says i didnt get to do pryin arter that night but i faound things about jest the same! yew want to know what the reel horror is, hey? wal, its this it aint what them fish devils hez done, but what theyre agoin to do! theyre abringin things up aout o whar they come from into the taown been doin it fer years, an slackenin up lately. them haouses north o the river betwixt water an main streets is full of em them devils an what they brung an when they git ready ... i say, when they git... ever hear tell of a shoggoth? hey, dye hear me? i tell ye i know what them things be i seen em one night when ... ehahhhah! eyahhh ... the hideous suddenness and inhuman frightfulness of the old mans shriek almost made me faint. his eyes, looking past me toward the malodorous sea, were positively starting from his head; while his face was a mask of fear worthy of greek tragedy. his bony claw dug monstrously into my shoulder, and he made no motion as i turned my head to look at whatever he had glimpsed. there was nothing that i could see. only the incoming tide, with perhaps one set of ripples more local than the longflung line of breakers. but now zadok was shaking me, and i turned back to watch the melting of that fearfrozen face into a chaos of twitching eyelids and mumbling gums. presently his voice came back albeit as a trembling whisper. git aout o here! get aout o here! they seen us git aout fer your life! dunt wait fer nothin they know naow run fer it quick aout o this taown another heavy wave dashed against the loosing masonry of the bygone wharf, and changed the mad ancients whisper to another inhuman and bloodcurdling scream. eyaahhhh! ... yheaaaaaa!... before i could recover my scattered wits he had relaxed his clutch on my shoulder and dashed wildly inland toward the street, reeling northward around the ruined warehouse wall. i glanced back at the sea, but there was nothing there. and when i reached water street and looked along it toward the north there was no remaining trace of zadok allen. iv i can hardly describe the mood in which i was left by this harrowing episode an episode at once mad and pitiful, grotesque and terrifying. the grocery boy had prepared me for it, yet the reality left me none the less bewildered and disturbed. puerile though the story was, old zadoks insane earnestness and horror had communicated to me a mounting unrest which joined with my earlier sense of loathing for the town and its blight of intangible shadow. though the golden light of late afternoon gave the ancient roofs and decrepit chimneys an air of mystic loveliness and peace, i could not help glancing over my shoulder now and then. i would surely be very glad to get out of malodorous and fearshadowed innsmouth, and wished there were some other vehicle than the bus driven by that sinisterlooking fellow sargent. yet i did not hurry too precipitately, for there were architectural details worth viewing at every silent corner; and i could easily, i calculated, cover the necessary distance in a halfhour. studying the grocery youths map and seeking a route i had not traversed before, i chose marsh street instead of state for my approach to town square. near the corner of fall street i began to see scattered groups of furtive whisperers, and when i finally reached the square i saw that almost all the loiterers were congregated around the door of the gilman house. it seemed as if many bulging, watery, unwinking eyes looked oddly at me as i claimed my valise in the lobby, and i hoped that none of these unpleasant creatures would be my fellowpassengers on the coach. the bus, rather early, rattled in with three passengers somewhat before eight, and an evillooking fellow on the sidewalk muttered a few indistinguishable words to the driver. sargent threw out a mailbag and a roll of newspapers, and entered the hotel; while the passengers the same men whom i had seen arriving in newburyport that morning shambled to the sidewalk and exchanged some faint guttural words with a loafer in a language i could have sworn was not english. i boarded the empty coach and took the seat i had taken before, but was hardly settled before sargent reappeared and began mumbling in a throaty voice of peculiar repulsiveness. despite what i had heard of this hotel in newburyport, i signed the register, paid my dollar, let the clerk take my valise, and followed that sour, solitary attendant up three creaking flights of stairs past dusty corridors which seemed wholly devoid of life. my room was a dismal rear one with two windows and bare, cheap furnishings, overlooked a dingy courtyard otherwise hemmed in by low, deserted brick blocks, and commanded a view of decrepit westwardstretching roofs with a marshy countryside beyond. at the end of the corridor was a bathroom a discouraging relique with ancient marble bowl, tin tub, faint electric light, and musty wooded paneling around all the plumbing fixtures. it being still daylight, i descended to the square and looked around for a dinner of some sort; noticing as i did so the strange glances i received from the unwholesome loafers. since the grocery was closed, i was forced to patronise the restaurant i had shunned before; a stooped, narrowheaded man with staring, unwinking eyes, and a flatnosed wench with unbelievably thick, clumsy hands being in attendance. the service was all of the counter type, and it relieved me to find that much was evidently served from cans and packages. a bowl of vegetable soup with crackers was enough for me, and i soon headed back for my cheerless room at the gilman; getting a evening paper and a flyspecked magazine from the evilvisaged clerk at the rickety stand beside his desk. as twilight deepened i turned on the one feeble electric bulb over the cheap, ironframed bed, and tried as best i could to continue the reading i had begun. i felt it advisable to keep my mind wholesomely occupied, for it would not do to brood over the abnormalities of this ancient, blightshadowed town while i was still within its borders. the insane yarn i had heard from the aged drunkard did not promise very pleasant dreams, and i felt i must keep the image of his wild, watery eyes as far as possible from my imagination. also, i must not dwell on what that factory inspector had told the newburyport ticketagent about the gilman house and the voices of its nocturnal tenants not on that, nor on the face beneath the tiara in the black church doorway; the face for whose horror my conscious mind could not account. it would perhaps have been easier to keep my thoughts from disturbing topics had the room not been so gruesomely musty. as it was, the lethal mustiness blended hideously with the towns general fishy odour and persistently focussed ones fancy on death and decay. another thing that disturbed me was the absence of a bolt on the door of my room. one had been there, as marks clearly shewed, but there were signs of recent removal. no doubt it had been out of order, like so many other things in this decrepit edifice. in my nervousness i looked around and discovered a bolt on the clothes press which seemed to be of the same size, judging from the marks, as the one formerly on the door. to gain a partial relief from the general tension i busied myself by transferring this hardware to the vacant place with the aid of a handy threeinone device including a screwdriver which i kept on my keyring. the bolt fitted perfectly, and i was somewhat relieved when i knew that i could shoot it firmly upon retiring. not that i had any real apprehension of its need, but that any symbol of security was welcome in an environment of this kind. there were adequate bolts on the two lateral doors to connecting rooms, and these i proceeded to fasten. i did not undress, but decided to read till i was sleepy and then lie down with only my coat, collar, and shoes off. taking a pocket flash light from my valise, i placed it in my trousers, so that i could read my watch if i woke up later in the dark. drowsiness, however, did not come; and when i stopped to analyse my thoughts i found to my disquiet that i was really unconsciously listening for something listening for something which i dreaded but could not name. that inspectors story must have worked on my imagination more deeply than i had suspected. again i tried to read, but found that i made no progress. after a time i seemed to hear the stairs and corridors creak at intervals as if with footsteps, and wondered if the other rooms were beginning to fill up. there were no voices, however, and it struck me that there was something subtly furtive about the creaking. i did not like it, and debated whether i had better try to sleep at all. this town had some queer people, and there had undoubtedly been several disappearances. was this one of those inns where travelers were slain for their money? surely i had no look of excessive prosperity. or were the towns folk really so resentful about curious visitors? had my obvious sightseeing, with its frequent mapconsultations, aroused unfavorable notice. it occurred to me that i must be in a highly nervous state to let a few random creakings set me off speculating in this fashion but i regretted none the less that i was unarmed. at length, feeling a fatigue which had nothing of drowsiness in it, i bolted the newly outfitted hall door, turned off the light, and threw myself down on the hard, uneven bed coat, collar, shoes, and all. in the darkness every faint noise of the night seemed magnified, and a flood of doubly unpleasant thoughts swept over me. i was sorry i had put out the light, yet was too tired to rise and turn it on again. then, after a long, dreary interval, and prefaced by a fresh creaking of stairs and corridor, there came that soft, damnably unmistakable sound which seemed like a malign fulfillment of all my apprehensions. without the least shadow of a doubt, the lock of my door was being tried cautiously, furtively, tentatively with a key. my sensations upon recognising this sign of actual peril were perhaps less rather than more tumultuous because of my previous vague fears. i had been, albeit without definite reason, instinctively on my guard and that was to my advantage in the new and real crisis, whatever it might turn out to be. nevertheless the change in the menace from vague premonition to immediate reality was a profound shock, and fell upon me with the force of a genuine blow. it never once occurred to me that the fumbling might be a mere mistake. malign purpose was all i could think of, and i kept deathly quiet, awaiting the wouldbe intruders next move. after a time the cautious rattling ceased, and i heard the room to the north entered with a pass key. then the lock of the connecting door to my room was softly tried. the bolt held, of course, and i heard the floor creak as the prowler left the room. after a moment there came another soft rattling, and i knew that the room to the south of me was being entered. again a furtive trying of a bolted connecting door, and again a receding creaking. this time the creaking went along the hall and down the stairs, so i knew that the prowler had realised the bolted condition of my doors and was giving up his attempt for a greater or lesser time, as the future would shew. the readiness with which i fell into a plan of action proves that i must have been subconsciously fearing some menace and considering possible avenues of escape for hours. from the first i felt that the unseen fumbler meant a danger not to be met or dealt with, but only to be fled from as precipitately as possible. the one thing to do was to get out of that hotel alive as quickly as i could, and through some channel other than the front stairs and lobby. rising softly and throwing my flashlight on the switch, i sought to light the bulb over my bed in order to choose and pocket some belongings for a swift, valiseless flight. nothing, however, happened; and i saw that the power had been cut off. clearly, some cryptic, evil movement was afoot on a large scale just what, i could not say. as i stood pondering with my hand on the now useless switch i heard a muffled creaking on the floor below, and thought i could barely distinguish voices in conversation. a moment later i felt less sure that the deeper sounds were voices, since the apparent hoarse barkings and loosesyllabled croakings bore so little resemblance to recognized human speech. then i thought with renewed force of what the factory inspector had heard in the night in this mouldering and pestilential building. having filled my pockets with the flashlights aid, i put on my hat and tiptoed to the windows to consider chances of descent. despite the states safety regulations there was no fire escape on this side of the hotel, and i saw that my windows commanded only a sheer three story drop to the cobbled courtyard. on the right and left, however, some ancient brick business blocks abutted on the hotel; their slant roofs coming up to a reasonable jumping distance from my fourthstory level. to reach either of these lines of buildings i would have to be in a room two from my own in one case on the north and in the other case on the south and my mind instantly set to work what chances i had of making the transfer. i could not, i decided, risk an emergence into the corridor; where my footsteps would surely be heard, and where the difficulties of entering the desired room would be insuperable. my progress, if it was to be made at all, would have to be through the less solidlybuilt connecting doors of the rooms; the locks and bolts of which i would have to force violently, using my shoulder as a batteringram whenever they were set against me. this, i thought, would be possible owing to the rickety nature of the house and its fixtures; but i realised i could not do it noiselessly. i would have to count on sheer speed, and the chance of getting to a window before any hostile forces became coordinated enough to open the right door toward me with a passkey. my own outer door i reinforced by pushing the bureau against it little by little, in order to make a minimum of sound. i perceived that my chances were very slender, and was fully prepared for any calamity. even getting to another roof would not solve the problem for there would then remain the task of reaching the ground and escaping from the town. one thing in my favour was the deserted and ruinous state of the abutting building and the number of skylights gaping blackly open in each row. gathering from the grocery boys map that the best route out of town was southward, i glanced first at the connecting door on the south side of the room. it was designed to open in my direction, hence i saw after drawing the bolt and finding other fastening in place it was not a favorable one for forcing. accordingly abandoning it as a route, i cautiously moved the bedstead against it to hamper any attack which might be made on it later from the next room. the door on the north was hung to open away from me, and this though a test proved it to be locked or bolted from the other side i knew must be my route. if i could gain the roofs of the buildings in paine street and descend successfully to the ground level, i might perhaps dart through the courtyard and the adjacent or opposite building to washington or bates or else emerge in paine and edge around southward into washington. in any case, i would aim to strike washington somehow and get quickly out of the town square region. my preference would be to avoid paine, since the fire station there might be open all night. as i thought of these things i looked out over the squalid sea of decaying roofs below me, now brightened by the beams of a moon not much past full. on the right the black gash of the rivergorge clove the panorama; abandoned factories and railway station clinging barnaclelike to its sides. beyond it the rusted railway and the rowley road led off through a flat marshy terrain dotted with islets of higher and dryer scrubgrown land. on the left the creekthreaded countryside was nearer, the narrow road to ipswich gleaming white in the moonlight. i could not see from my side of the hotel the southward route toward arkham which i had determined to take. i was irresolutely speculating on when i had better attack the northward door, and on how i could least audibly manage it, when i noticed that the vague noises underfoot had given place to a fresh and heavier creaking of the stairs. a wavering flicker of light shewed through my transom, and the boards of the corridor began to groan with a ponderous load. muffled sounds of possible vocal origin approached, and at length a firm knock came at my outer door. for a moment i simply held my breath and waited. eternities seemed to elapse, and the nauseous fishy odour of my environment seemed to mount suddenly and spectacularly. then the knocking was repeated continuously, and with growing insistence. i knew that the time for action had come, and forthwith drew the bolt of the northward connecting door, bracing myself for the task of battering it open. the knocking waxed louder, and i hoped that its volume would cover the sound of my efforts. at last beginning my attempt, i lunged again and again at the thin paneling with my left shoulder, heedless of shock or pain. the door resisted even more than i expected, but i did not give in. and all the while the clamour at the outer door increased. finally the connecting door gave, but with such a crash that i knew those outside must have heard. instantly the outside knocking became a violent battering, while keys sounded ominously in the hall doors of the rooms on both sides of me. rushing through the newly opened connexion, i succeeded in bolting the northerly hall door before the lock could he turned; but even as i did so i heard the hall door of the third room the one from whose window i had hoped to reach the roof below being tried with a pass key. for an instant i felt absolute despair, since my trapping in a chamber with no window egress seemed complete. a wave of almost abnormal horror swept over me, and invested with a terrible but unexplainable singularity the flashlightglimpsed dust prints made by the intruder who had lately tried my door from this room. then, with a dazed automatism which persisted despite hopelessness, i made for the next connecting door and performed the blind motion of pushing at it in an effort to get through and granting that fastenings might be as providentially intact as in this second room bolt the hall door beyond before the lock could be turned from outside. sheer fortunate chance gave me my reprieve for the connecting door before me was not only unlocked but actually ajar. in a second i was though, and had my right knee and shoulder against a hall door which was visibly opening inward. my pressure took the opener off guard, for the thing shut as i pushed, so that i could slip the wellconditioned bolt as i had done with the other door. as i gained this respite i heard the battering at the two other doors abate, while a confused clatter came from the connecting door i had shielded with the bedstead. evidently the bulk of my assailants had entered the southerly room and were massing in a lateral attack. but at the same moment a pass key sounded in the next door to the north, and i knew that a nearer peril was at hand. the northward connecting door was wide open, but there was no time to think about checking the already turning lock in the hall. all i could do was to shut and bolt the open connecting door, as well as its mate on the opposite side pushing a bedstead against the one and a bureau against the other, and moving a washstand in front of the hall door. i must, i saw, trust to such makeshift barriers to shield me till i could get out the window and on the roof of the paine street block. but even in this acute moment my chief horror was something apart from the immediate weakness of my defenses. i was shuddering because not one of my pursuers, despite some hideous panting, grunting, and subdued barkings at odd intervals, was uttering an unmuffled or intelligible vocal sound. as i moved the furniture and rushed toward the windows i heard a frightful scurrying along the corridor toward the room north of me, and perceived that the southward battering had ceased. plainly, most of my opponents were about to concentrate against the feeble connecting door which they knew must open directly on me. outside, the moon played on the ridgepole of the block below, and i saw that the jump would be desperately hazardous because of the steep surface on which i must land. surveying the conditions, i chose the more southerly of the two windows as my avenue of escape; planning to land on the inner slope of the roof and make for the nearest skylight. once inside one of the decrepit brick structures i would have to reckon with pursuit; but i hoped to descend and dodge in and out of yawning doorways along the shadowed courtyard, eventually getting to washington street and slipping out of town toward the south. the clatter at the northerly connecting door was now terrific, and i saw that the weak panelling was beginning to splinter. obviously, the besiegers had brought some ponderous object into play as a batteringram. the bedstead, however, still held firm; so that i had at least a faint chance of making good my escape. as i opened the window i noticed that it was flanked by heavy velour draperies suspended from a pole by brass rings, and also that there was a large projecting catch for the shutters on the exterior. seeing a possible means of avoiding the dangerous jump, i yanked at the hangings and brought them down, pole and all; then quickly hooking two of the rings in the shutter catch and flinging the drapery outside. the heavy folds reached fully to the abutting roof, and i saw that the rings and catch would be likely to bear my weight. so, climbing out of the window and down the improvised rope ladder, i left behind me forever the morbid and horrorinfested fabric of the gilman house. i landed safely on the loose slates of the steep roof, and succeeded in gaining the gaping black skylight without a slip. glancing up at the window i had left, i observed it was still dark, though far across the crumbling chimneys to the north i could see lights ominously blazing in the order of dagon hall, the baptist church, and the congregational church which i recalled so shiveringly. there had seemed to be no one in the courtyard below, and i hoped there would be a chance to get away before the spreading of a general alarm. flashing my pocket lamp into the skylight, i saw that there were no steps down. the distance was slight, however, so i clambered over the brink and dropped; striking a dusty floor littered with crumbling boxes and barrels. the moonbeams did not reach down here, but i could just see my way about without using the flashlight. some of the windows on the gilman house side were faintly glowing, and i thought i heard confused sounds within. walking softly over to the washington street side i perceived several open doorways, and chose the nearest as my route out. the hallway inside was black, and when i reached the opposite end i saw that the street door was wedged immovably shut. resolved to try another building, i groped my way back toward the courtyard, but stopped short when close to the doorway. for out of an opened door in the gilman house a large crowd of doubtful shapes was pouring lanterns bobbing in the darkness, and horrible croaking voices exchanging low cries in what was certainly not english. the figures moved uncertainly, and i realized to my relief that they did not know where i had gone; but for all that they sent a shiver of horror through my frame. their features were indistinguishable, but their crouching, shambling gait was abominably repellent. and worst of all, i perceived that one figure was strangely robed, and unmistakably surmounted by a tall tiara of a design altogether too familiar. as the figures spread throughout the courtyard, i felt my fears increase. suppose i could find no egress from this building on the street side? the fishy odour was detestable, and i wondered i could stand it without fainting. again groping toward the street, i opened a door off the hall and came upon an empty room with closely shuttered but sashless windows. fumbling in the rays of my flashlight, i found i could open the shutters; and in another moment had climbed outside and was fully closing the aperture in its original manner. i was now in washington street, and for the moment saw no living thing nor any light save that of the moon. from several directions in the distance, however, i could hear the sound of hoarse voices, of footsteps, and of a curious kind of pattering which did not sound quite like footsteps. plainly i had no time to lose. the points of the compass were clear to me, and i was glad that all the street lights were turned off, as is often the custom on strongly moonlit nights in prosperous rural regions. some of the sounds came from the south, yet i retained my design of escaping in that direction. there would, i knew, be plenty of deserted doorways to shelter me in case i met any person or group who looked like pursuers. i walked rapidly, softly, and close to the ruined houses. while hatless and dishevelled after my arduous climb, i did not look especially noticeable; and stood a good chance of passing unheeded if forced to encounter any casual wayfarer. at bates street i drew into a yawning vestibule while two shambling figures crossed in front of me, but was soon on my way again and approaching the open space where eliot street obliquely crosses washington at the intersection of south. though i had never seen this space, it had looked dangerous to me on the grocery youths map; since the moonlight would have free play there. there was no use trying to evade it, for any alternative course would involve detours of possibly disastrous visibility and delaying effect. the only thing to do was to cross it boldly and openly; imitating the typical shamble of the innsmouth folk as best i could, and trusting that no one or at least no pursuer of mine would be there. just how fully the pursuit was organised and indeed, just what its purpose might be i could form no idea. there seemed to be unusual activity in the town, but i judged that the news of my escape from the gilman had not yet spread. i would, of course, soon have to shift from washington to some other southward street; for that party from the hotel would doubtless be after me. i must have left dust prints in that last old building, revealing how i had gained the street. the open space was, as i had expected, strongly moonlit; and i saw the remains of a parklike, ironrailed green in its center. fortunately no one was about though a curious sort of buzz or roar seemed to be increasing in the direction of town square. south street was very wide, leading directly down a slight declivity to the waterfront and commanding a long view out a sea; and i hoped that no one would be glancing up it from afar as i crossed in the bright moonlight. my progress was unimpeded, and no fresh sound arose to hint that i had been spied. glancing about me, i involuntarily let my pace slacken for a second to take in the sight of the sea, gorgeous in the burning moonlight at the streets end. far out beyond the breakwater was the dim, dark line of devil reef, and as i glimpsed it i could not help thinking of all the hideous legends i had heard in the last twentyfour hours legends which portrayed this ragged rock as a veritable gateway to realms of unfathomed horror and inconceivable abnormality. then, without warning, i saw the intermittent flashes of light on the distant reef. they were definite and unmistakable, and awaked in my mind a blind horror beyond all rational proportion. my muscles tightened for panic flight, held in only by a certain unconscious caution and halfhypnotic fascination. and to make matters worse, there now flashed forth from the lofty cupola of the gilman house, which loomed up to the northeast behind me, a series of analogous though differently spaced gleams which could be nothing less than an answering signal. controlling my muscles, and realising afresh how plainly visible i was, i resumed my brisker and feignedly shambling pace; though keeping my eyes on that hellish and ominous reef as long as the opening of south street gave me a seaward view. what the whole proceeding meant, i could not imagine; unless it involved some strange rite connected with devil reef, or unless some party had landed from a ship on that sinister rock. i now bent to the left around the ruinous green; still gazing toward the ocean as it blazed in the spectral summer moonlight, and watching the cryptical flashing of those nameless, unexplainable beacons. it was then that the most horrible impression of all was borne in upon me the impression which destroyed my last vestige of selfcontrol and sent me running frantically southward past the yawning black doorways and fishily staring windows of that deserted nightmare street. for at a closer glance i saw that the moonlit waters between the reef and the shore were far from empty. they were alive with a teeming horde of shapes swimming inward toward the town; and even at my vast distance and in my single moment of perception i could tell that the bobbing heads and flailing arms were alien and aberrant in a way scarcely to be expressed or consciously formulated. my frantic running ceased before i had covered a block, for at my left i began to hear something like the hue and cry of organised pursuit. there were footsteps and gutteral sounds, and a rattling motor wheezed south along federal street. in a second all my plans were utterly changed for if the southward highway were blocked ahead of me, i must clearly find another egress from innsmouth. i paused and drew into a gaping doorway, reflecting how lucky i was to have left the moonlit open space before these pursuers came down the parallel street. a second reflection was less comforting. since the pursuit was down another street, it was plain that the party was not following me directly. it had not seen me, but was simply obeying a general plan of cutting off my escape. this, however, implied that all roads leading out of innsmouth were similarly patrolled; for the people could not have known what route i intended to take. if this were so, i would have to make my retreat across country away from any road; but how could i do that in view of the marshy and creekriddled nature of all the surrounding region? for a moment my brain reeled both from sheer hopelessness and from a rapid increase in the omnipresent fishy odour. then i thought of the abandoned railway to rowley, whose solid line of ballasted, weedgrown earth still stretched off to the northwest from the crumbling station on the edge at the rivergorge. there was just a chance that the townsfolk would not think of that; since its briarchoked desertion made it halfimpassable, and the unlikeliest of all avenues for a fugitive to choose. i had seen it clearly from my hotel window and knew about how it lay. most of its earlier length was uncomfortably visible from the rowley road, and from high places in the town itself; but one could perhaps crawl inconspicuously through the undergrowth. at any rate, it would form my only chance of deliverance, and there was nothing to do but try it. drawing inside the hall of my deserted shelter, i once more consulted the grocery boys map with the aid of the flashlight. the immediate problem was how to reach the ancient railway; and i now saw that the safest course was ahead to babson street; then west to lafayette there edging around but not crossing an open space homologous to the one i had traversed and subsequently back northward and westward in a zigzagging line through lafayette, bates, adam, and bank streets the latter skirting the river gorge to the abandoned and dilapidated station i had seen from my window. my reason for going ahead to babson was that i wished neither to recross the earlier open space nor to begin my westward course along a cross street as broad as south. starting once more, i crossed the street to the righthand side in order to edge around into babeon as inconspicuously as possible. noises still continued in federal street, and as i glanced behind me i thought i saw a gleam of light near the building through which i had escaped. anxious to leave washington street, i broke into a quiet dogtrot, trusting to luck not to encounter any observing eye. next the corner of babson street i saw to my alarm that one of the houses was still inhabited, as attested by curtains at the window; but there were no lights within, and i passed it without disaster. in babson street, which crossed federal and might thus reveal me to the searchers, i clung as closely as possible to the sagging, uneven buildings; twice pausing in a doorway as the noises behind me momentarily increased. the open space ahead shone wide and desolate under the moon, but my route would not force me to cross it. during my second pause i began to detect a fresh distribution of vague sounds; and upon looking cautiously out from cover beheld a motor car darting across the open space, bound outward along eliot street, which there intersects both babson and lafayette. as i watched choked by a sudden rise in the fishy odour after a short abatement i saw a band of uncouth, crouching shapes loping and shambling in the same direction; and knew that this must be the party guarding the ipswich road, since that highway forms an extension of eliot street. two of the figures i glimpsed were in voluminous robes, and one wore a peaked diadem which glistened whitely in the moonlight. the gait of this figure was so odd that it sent a chill through me for it seemed to me the creature was almost hopping. when the last of the band was out of sight i resumed my progress; darting around the corner into lafayette street, and crossing eliot very hurriedly lest stragglers of the party be still advancing along that thoroughfare. i did hear some croaking and clattering sounds far off toward town square, but accomplished the passage without disaster. my greatest dread was in recrossing broad and moonlit south street with its seaward view and i had to nerve myself for the ordeal. someone might easily be looking, and possible eliot street stragglers could not fail to glimpse me from either of two points. at the last moment i decided i had better slacken my trot and make the crossing as before in the shambling gait of an average innsmouth native. when the view of the water again opened out this time on my right i was halfdetermined not to look at it at all. i could not however, resist; but cast a sidelong glance as i carefully and imitatively shambled toward the protecting shadows ahead. there was no ship visible, as i had halfexpected there would be. instead, the first thing which caught my eye was a small rowboat pulling in toward the abandoned wharves and laden with some bulky, tarpaulincovered object. its rowers, though distantly and indistinctly seen, were of an especially repellent aspect. several swimmers were still discernible; while on the far black reef i could see a faint, steady glow unlike the winking beacon visible before, and of a curious colour which i could not precisely identify. above the slant roofs ahead and to the right there loomed the tall cupola of the gilman house, but it was completely dark. the fishy odour, dispelled for a moment by some merciful breeze, now closed in again with maddening intensity. i had not quite crossed the street when i heard a muttering band advancing along washington from the north. as they reached the broad open space where i had had my first disquieting glimpse of the moonlit water i could see them plainly only a block away and was horrified by the bestial abnormality of their faces and the doglike subhumanness of their crouching gait. one man moved in a positively simian way, with long arms frequently touching the ground; while another figure robed and tiaraed seemed to progress in an almost hopping fashion. i judged this party to be the one i had seen in the gilmans courtyard the one, therefore, most closely on my trail. as some of the figures turned to look in my direction i was transfixed with fright, yet managed to preserve the casual, shambling gait i had assumed. to this day i do not know whether they saw me or not. if they did, my stratagem must have deceived them, for they passed on across the moonlit space without varying their course meanwhile croaking and jabbering in some hateful guttural patois i could not identify. once more in shadow, i resumed my former dogtrot past the leaning and decrepit houses that stared blankly into the night. having crossed to the western sidewalk i rounded the nearest corner into bates street where i kept close to the buildings on the southern side. i passed two houses shewing signs of habitation, one of which had faint lights in upper rooms, yet met with no obstacle. as i tuned into adams street i felt measurably safer, but received a shook when a man reeled out of a black doorway directly in front of me. he proved, however, too hopelessly drunk to be a menace; so that i reached the dismal ruins of the bank street warehouses in safety. no one was stirring in that dead street beside the rivergorge, and the roar of the waterfalls quite drowned my foot steps. it was a long dogtrot to the ruined station, and the great brick warehouse walls around me seemed somehow more terrifying than the fronts of private houses. at last i saw the ancient arcaded station or what was left of it and made directly for the tracks that started from its farther end. the rails were rusty but mainly intact, and not more than half the ties had rotted away. walking or running on such a surface was very difficult; but i did my best, and on the whole made very fair time. for some distance the line kept on along the gorges brink, but at length i reached the long covered bridge where it crossed the chasm at a dizzying height. the condition of this bridge would determine my next step. if humanly possible, i would use it; if not, l would have to risk more street wandering and take the nearest intact highway bridge. the vast, barnlike length of the old bridge gleamed spectrally in the moonlight, and i saw that the ties were safe for at least a few feet within. entering, i began to use my flashlight, and was almost knocked down by the cloud of bats that flapped past me. about halfway across there was a perilous gap in the ties which i feared for a moment would halt me; but in the end i risked a desperate jump which fortunately succeeded. i was glad to see the moonlight again when i emerged from that macabre tunnel. the old tracks crossed river street at grade, and at once veered off into a region increasingly rural and with less and less of innsmouths abhorrent fishy odour. here the dense growth of weeds and briers hindered me and cruelly tore at my clothes, but i was none the less glad that they were there to give me concealment in case of peril. i knew that much of my route must be visible from the rowley road. the marshy region began very abruptly, with the single track on a low, grassy embankment where the weedy growth was somewhat thinner. then came a sort of island of higher ground, where the line passed through a shallow open cut choked with bushes and brambles. i was very glad of this partial shelter, since at this point the rowley road was uncomfortably near according to my window view. at the end of the cut it would cross the track and swerve off to a safer distance; but meanwhile i must be exceedingly careful. i was by this time thankfully certain that the railway itself was not patrolled. just before entering the cut i glanced behind me, but saw no pursuer. the ancient spires and roofs of decaying innsmouth gleamed lovely and ethereal in the magic yellow moonlight, and i thought of how they must have looked in the old days before the shadow fell. then, as my gaze circled inland from the town, something less tranquil arrested my notice and held me immobile for a second. what i saw or fancied i saw was a disturbing suggestion of undulant motion far to the south; a suggestion which made me conclude that a very large horde must be pouring out of the city along the level ipswich road. the distance was great and i could distinguish nothing in detail; but i did not at all like the look of that moving column. it undulated too much, and glistened too brightly in the rays of the now westering moon. there was a suggestion of sound, too, though the wind was blowing the other way a suggestion of bestial scraping and bellowing even worse than the muttering of the parties i had lately overheard. all sorts of unpleasant conjectures crossed my mind. i thought of those very extreme innsmouth types said to be hidden in crumbling, centuried warrens near the waterfront; i thought, too, of those nameless swimmers i had seen. counting the parties so far glimpsed, as well as those presumably covering other roads, the number of my pursuers must be strangely large for a town as depopulated as innsmouth. whence could come the dense personnel of such a column as i now beheld? did those ancient, unplumbed warrens teem with a twisted, uncatalogued, and unsuspected life? or had some unseen ship indeed landed a legion of unknown outsiders on that hellish reef? who were they? why were they here? and if such a column of them was scouring the ipswich road, would the patrols on the other roads be likewise augmented? i had entered the brushgrown cut and was struggling along at a very slow pace when that damnable fishy odour again waxed dominant. had the wind suddenly changed eastward, so that it blew in from the sea and over the town? it must have, i concluded, since i now began to hear shocking guttural murmurs from that hitherto silent direction. there was another sound, too a kind of wholesale, colossal flopping or pattering which somehow called up images of the most detestable sort. it made me think illogically of that unpleasantly undulating column on the faroff ipswich road. and then both stench and sounds grew stronger, so that i paused shivering and grateful for the cuts protection. it was here, i recalled, that the rowley road drew so close to the old railway before crossing westward and diverging. something was coming along that road, and i must lie low till its passage and vanishment in the distance. thank heaven these creatures employed no dogs for tracking though perhaps that would have been impossible amidst the omnipresent regional odour. crouched in the bushes of that sandy cleft i felt reasonably safe, even though i knew the searchers would have to cross the track in front of me not much more than a hundred yards away. i would be able to see them, but they could not, except by a malign miracle, see me. all at once i began dreading to look at them as they passed. i saw the close moonlit space where they would surge by, and had curious thoughts about the irredeemable pollution of that space. they would perhaps be the worst of all innsmouth types something one would not care to remember. the stench waxed overpowering, and the noises swelled to a bestial babel of croaking, baying and barking without the least suggestion of human speech. were these indeed the voices of my pursuers? did they have dogs after all? so far i had seen none of the lower animals in innsmouth. that flopping or pattering was monstrous i could not look upon the degenerate creatures responsible for it. i would keep my eyes shut till the sound receded toward the west. the horde was very close now air foul with their hoarse snarlings, and the ground almost shaking with their alienrhythmed footfalls. my breath nearly ceased to come, and i put every ounce of willpower into the task of holding my eyelids down. i am not even yet willing to say whether what followed was a hideous actuality or only a nightmare hallucination. the later action of the government, after my frantic appeals, would tend to confirm it as a monstrous truth; but could not an hallucination have been repeated under the quasihypnotic spell of that ancient, haunted, and shadowed town? such places have strange properties, and the legacy of insane legend might well have acted on more than one human imagination amidst those dead, stenchcursed streets and huddles of rotting roofs and crumbling steeples. is it not possible that the germ of an actual contagious madness lurks in the depths of that shadow over innsmouth? who can be sure of reality after hearing things like the tale of old zadok allen? the government men never found poor zadok, and have no conjectures to make as to what became of him. where does madness leave off and reality begin? is it possible that even my latest fear is sheer delusion? but i must try to tell what i thought i saw that night under the mocking yellow moon saw surging and hopping down the rowley road in plain sight in front of me as i crouched among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut. of course my resolution to keep my eyes shut had failed. it was foredoomed to failure for who could crouch blindly while a legion of croaking, baying entities of unknown source flopped noisomely past, scarcely more than a hundred yards away? i thought i was prepared for the worst, and i really ought to have been prepared considering what i had seen before. my other pursuers had been accursedly abnormal so should i not have been ready to face a strengthening of the abnormal element; to look upon forms in which there was no mixture of the normal at all? i did not open my eyes until the raucous clamour came loudly from a point obviously straight ahead. then i knew that a long section of them must be plainly in sight where the sides of the cut flattened out and the road crossed the track and i could no longer keep myself from sampling whatever honor that leering yellow moon might have to shew. it was the end, for whatever remains to me of life on the surface of this earth, of every vestige of mental peace and confidence in the integrity of nature and of the human mind. nothing that i could have imagined nothing, even, that i could have gathered had i credited old zadoks crazy tale in the most literal way would be in any way comparable to the demoniac, blasphemous reality that i saw or believe i saw. i have tied to hint what it was in order to postpone the horror of writing it down baldly. can it be possible that this planet has actually spawned such things; that human eyes have truly seen, as objective flesh, what man has hitherto known only in febrile phantasy and tenuous legend? and yet i saw them in a limitless stream flopping, hopping, croaking, bleating urging inhumanly through the spectral moonlight in a grotesque, malignant saraband of fantastic nightmare. and some of them had tall tiaras of that nameless whitishgold metal ... and some were strangely robed ... and one, who led the way, was clad in a ghoulishly humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a mans felt hat perched on the shapeless thing that answered for a head. i think their predominant colour was a greyishgreen, though they had white bellies. they were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were scaly. their forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads of fish, with prodigious bulging eyes that never closed. at the sides of their necks were palpitating gills, and their long paws were webbed. they hopped irregularly, sometimes on two legs and sometimes on four. i was somehow glad that they had no more than four limbs. their croaking, baying voices, clearly wed tar articulate speech, held all the dark shades of expression which their staring faces lacked. but for all of their monstrousness they were not unfamiliar to me. i knew too well what they must be for was not the memory of the evil tiara at newburyport still fresh? they were the blasphemous fishfrogs of the nameless design living and horrible and as i saw them i knew also of what that humped, tiaraed priest in the black church basement had fearsomely reminded me. their number was past guessing. it seemed to me that there were limitless swarms of them and certainly my momentary glimpse could have shewn only the least fraction. in another instant everything was blotted out by a merciful fit of fainting; the first i had ever had. v it was a gentle daylight rain that awaked me front my stupor in the brushgrown railway cut, and when i staggered out to the roadway ahead i saw no trace of any prints in the fresh mud. the fishy odour, too, was gone, innsmouths ruined roofs and toppling steeples loomed up greyly toward the southeast, but not a living creature did i spy in all the desolate salt marshes around. my watch was still going, and told me that the hour was past noon. the reality of what i had been through was highly uncertain in my mind, but i felt that something hideous lay in the background. i must get away from evilshadowed innsmouth and accordingly i began to test my cramped, wearied powers of locomotion. despite weakness hunger, horror, and bewilderment i found myself after a time able to walk; so started slowly along the muddy road to rowley. before evening i was in village, getting a meal and providing myself with presentable cloths. i caught the night train to arkham, and the next day talked long and earnestly with government officials there; a process i later repeated in boston. with the main result of these colloquies the public is now familiar and i wish, for normalitys sake, there were nothing more to tell. perhaps it is madness that is overtaking me yet perhaps a greater horror or a greater marvel is reaching out. it seemed that a material uncle of mine had been there many years before on a quest much like my own; and that my grandmothers family was a topic of some local curiosity. there had, mr. peabody said, been considerable discussion about the marriage of her father, benjamin orne, just after the civil war; since the ancestry of the bride was peculiarly puzzling. that bride was understood to have been an orphaned marsh of new hampshire a cousin of the essex county marshes but her education had been in france and she knew very little of her family. a guardian had deposited funds in a boston bank to maintain her and her french governess; but that guardians name was unfamiliar to arkham people, and in time he dropped out of sight, so that the governess assumed the role by court appointment. the frenchwoman now long dead was very taciturn, and there were those who said she would have told more than she did. but the most baffling thing was the inability of anyone to place the recorded parents of the young woman enoch and lydia (meserve) marsh among the known families of new hampshire. possibly, many suggested, she was the natural daughter of some marsh of prominence she certainly had the true marsh eyes. most of the puzzling was done after her early death, which took place at the birth of my grandmother her only child. having formed some disagreeable impressions connected with the name of marsh, i did not welcome the news that it belonged on my own ancestral tree; nor was i pleased by mr. peabodys suggestion that i had the true marsh eyes myself. however, i was grateful for data which i knew would prove valuable; and took copious notes and lists of book references regarding the welldocumented orne family. i went directly home to toledo from boston, and later spent a month at maumee recuperating from my ordeal. in september i entered oberlin for my final year, and from then till the next june was busy with studies and other wholesome activities reminded of the bygone terror only by occasional official visits from government men in connexion with the campaign which my pleas and evidence had started. around the middle of july just a year after the innsmouth experience i spent a week with my late mothers family in cleveland; checking some of my new genealogical data with the various notes, traditions, and bits of heirloom material in existence there, and seeing what kind of a connected chart i could construct. i did not exactly relish this task, for the atmosphere of the williamson home had always depressed me. there was a strain of morbidity there, and my mother had never encouraged my visiting her parents as a child, although she always welcomed her father when he came to toledo. my arkhamborn grandmother had seemed strange and almost terrifying to me, and i do not think i grieved when she disappeared. i was eight years old then, and it was said that she had wandered off in grief after the suicide of my uncle douglas, her eldest son. he had shot himself after a trip to new england the same trip, no doubt, which had caused him to be recalled at the arkham historical society. this uncle had resembled her, and i had never liked him either. something about the staring, unwinking expression of both of them had given me a vague, unaccountable uneasiness. my mother and uncle walter had not looked like that. they were like their father, though poor little cousin lawrence walters son had been almost perfect duplicate of his grandmother before his condition took him to the permanent seclusion of a sanitarium at canton. i had not seen him in four years, but my uncle once implied that his state, both mental and physical, was very bad. this worry had probably been a major cause of his mothers death two years before. my grandfather and his widowed son walter now comprised the cleveland household, but the memory of older times hung thickly over it. i still disliked the place, and tried to get my researches done as quickly as possible. williamson records and traditions were supplied in abundance by my grandfather; though for orne material i had to depend on my uncle walter, who put at my disposal the contents of all his files, including notes, letters, cuttings, heirlooms, photographs, and miniatures. it was in going over the letters and pictures on the orne side that i began to acquire a kind of terror of my own ancestry. as i have said, my grandmother and uncle douglas had always disturbed me. now, years after their passing, i gazed at their pictured faces with a measurably heightened feeling of repulsion and alienation. i could not at first understand the change, but gradually a horrible sort of comparison began to obtrude itself on my unconscious mind despite the steady refusal of my consciousness to admit even the least suspicion of it. it was clear that the typical expression of these faces now suggested something it had not suggested before something which would bring stark panic if too openly thought of. but the worst shock came when my uncle shewed me the orne jewellery in a downtown safe deposit vault. some of the items were delicate and inspiring enough, but there was one box of strange old pieces descended from my mysterious greatgrandmother which my uncle was almost reluctant to produce. they were, he said, of very grotesque and almost repulsive design, and had never to his knowledge been publicly worn; though my grandmother used to enjoy looking at them. vague legends of bad luck clustered around them, and my greatgrandmothers french governess had said they ought not to be worn in new england, though it would be quite safe to wear them in europe. as my uncle began slowly and grudgingly to unwrap the things he urged me not to be shocked by the strangeness and frequent hideousness of the designs. artists and archaeologists who had seen them pronounced their workmanship superlatively and exotically exquisite, though no one seemed able to define their exact material or assign them to any specific art tradition. there were two armlets, a tiara, and a kind of pectoral; the latter having in high relief certain figures of almost unbearable extravagance. during this description i had kept a tight rein on my emotions, but my face must have betrayed my mounting fears. my uncle looked concerned, and paused in his unwrapping to study my countenance. i motioned to him to continue, which he did with renewed signs of reluctance. he seemed to expect some demonstration when the first piece the tiara became visible, but i doubt if he expected quite what actually happened. i did not expect it, either, for i thought i was thoroughly forewarned regarding what the jewellery would turn out to be. what i did was to faint silently away, just as i had done in that brier choked railway cut a year before. from that day on my life has been a nightmare of brooding and apprehension nor do i know how much is hideous truth and how much madness. my greatgrandmother had been a marsh of unknown source whose husband lived in arkham and did not old zadok say that the daughter of obed marsh by a monstrous mother was married to an arkham man trough trick? what was it the ancient toper had muttered about the line of my eyes to captain obeds? in arkham, too, the curator had told me i had the true marsh eyes. was obed marsh my own greatgreatgrandfather? who or what then, was my greatgreatgrandmother? but perhaps this was all madness. those whitishgold ornaments might easily have been bought from some innsmouth sailor by the father of my greatgrandmother, whoever he was. and that look in the staringeyed faces of my grandmother and selfslain uncle might be sheer fancy on my part sheer fancy, bolstered up by the innsmouth shadow which had so darkly coloured my imagination. but why had my uncle killed himself after an ancestral quest in new england? there was much more than i could remember, but even what i did remember each morning would be enough to stamp me as a madman or a genius if ever i dared write it down. some frightful influence, i felt, was seeking gradually to drag me out of the sane world of wholesome life into unnamable abysses of blackness and alienage; and the process told heavily on me. my health and appearance grew steadily worse, till finally i was forced to give up my position and adopt the static, secluded life of an invalid. some odd nervous affliction had me in its grip, and i found myself at times almost unable to shut my eyes. it was then that i began to study the mirror with mounting alarm. the slow ravages of disease are not pleasant to watch, but in my case there was something subtler and more puzzling in the background. my father seemed to notice it, too, for he began looking at me curiously and almost affrightedly. what was taking place in me? could it be that i was coming to resemble my grandmother and uncle douglas? one night i had a frightful dream in which i met my grandmother under the sea. she lived in a phosphorescent palace of many terraces, with gardens of strange leprous corals and grotesque brachiate efflorescences, and welcomed me with a warmth that may have been sardonic. she had changed as those who take to the water change and told me she had never died. instead, she had gone to a spot her dead son had learned about, and had leaped to a realm whose wonders destined for him as well he had spurned with a smoking pistol. this was to be my realm, too i could not escape it. i would never die, but would live with those who had lived since before man ever walked the earth. i met also that which had been her grandmother. for eighty thousand years pththyalyi had lived in yhanthlei, and thither she had gone back after obed marsh was dead. yhanthlei was not destroyed when the upperearth men shot death into the sea. it was hurt, but not destroyed. the deep ones could never be destroyed, even though the palaeogean magic of the forgotten old ones might sometimes check them. for the present they would rest; but some day, if they remembered, they would rise again for the tribute great cthulhu craved. it would be a city greater than innsmouth next time. they had planned to spread, and had brought up that which would help them, but now they must wait once more. for bringing the upperearth mens death i must do a penance, but that would not be heavy. this was the dream in which i saw a shoggoth for the first time, and the sight set me awake in a frenzy of screaming. that morning the mirror definitely told me i had acquired the innsmouth look. so far i have not shot myself as my uncle douglas did. i bought an automatic and almost took the step, but certain dreams deterred me. the tense extremes of horror are lessening, and i feel queerly drawn toward the unknown seadeeps instead of fearing them. i hear and do strange things in sleep, and awake with a kind of exaltation instead of terror. i do not believe i need to wait for the full change as most have waited. if i did, my father would probably shut me up in a sanitarium as my poor little cousin is shut up. stupendous and unheardof splendors await me below, and i shall seek them soon. iarlyehl cihuiha flgagnl id ia! no, i shall not shoot myself i cannot be made to shoot myself! i shall plan my cousins escape from that canton madhouse, and together we shall go to marvelshadowed innsmouth. we shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea and dive down through black abysses to cyclopean and manycolumned yhanthlei, and in that lair of the deep ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory for ever. the alchemist high up, crowning the grassy summit of a swelling mount whose sides are wooded near the base with the gnarled trees of the primeval forest stands the old chateau of my ancestors. for centuries its lofty battlements have frowned down upon the wild and rugged countryside about, serving as a home and stronghold for the proud house whose honored line is older even than the mossgrown castle walls. these ancient turrets, stained by the storms of generations and crumbling under the slow yet mighty pressure of time, formed in the ages of feudalism one of the most dreaded and formidable fortresses in all france. from its machicolated parapets and mounted battlements barons, counts, and even kings had been defied, yet never had its spacious halls resounded to the footsteps of the invader. but since those glorious years, all is changed. a poverty but little above the level of dire want, together with a pride of name that forbids its alleviation by the pursuits of commercial life, have prevented the scions of our line from maintaining their estates in pristine splendour; and the falling stones of the walls, the overgrown vegetation in the parks, the dry and dusty moat, the illpaved courtyards, and toppling towers without, as well as the sagging floors, the wormeaten wainscots, and the faded tapestries within, all tell a gloomy tale of fallen grandeur. as the ages passed, first one, then another of the four great turrets were left to ruin, until at last but a single tower housed the sadly reduced descendants of the once mighty lords of the estate. it was in one of the vast and gloomy chambers of this remaining tower that i, antoine, last of the unhappy and accursed counts de c, first saw the light of day, ninety long years ago. within these walls and amongst the dark and shadowy forests, the wild ravines and grottos of the hillside below, were spent the first years of my troubled life. my parents i never knew. my father had been killed at the age of thirtytwo, a month before i was born, by the fall of a stone somehow dislodged from one of the deserted parapets of the castle. and my mother having died at my birth, my care and education devolved solely upon one remaining servitor, an old and trusted man of considerable intelligence, whose name i remember as pierre. i was an only child and the lack of companionship which this fact entailed upon me was augmented by the strange care exercised by my aged guardian, in excluding me from the society of the peasant children whose abodes were scattered here and there upon the plains that surround the base of the hill. at that time, pierre said that this restriction was imposed upon me because my noble birth placed me above association with such plebeian company. now i know that its real object was to keep from my ears the idle tales of the dread curse upon our line that were nightly told and magnified by the simple tenantry as they conversed in hushed accents in the glow of their cottage hearths. thus isolated, and thrown upon my own resources, i spent the hours of my childhood in poring over the ancient tomes that filled the shadow haunted library of the chateau, and in roaming without aim or purpose through the perpetual dust of the spectral wood that clothes the side of the hill near its foot. it was perhaps an effect of such surroundings that my mind early acquired a shade of melancholy. those studies and pursuits which partake of the dark and occult in nature most strongly claimed my attention. of my own race i was permitted to learn singularly little, yet what small knowledge of it i was able to gain seemed to depress me much. perhaps it was at first only the manifest reluctance of my old preceptor to discuss with me my paternal ancestry that gave rise to the terror which i ever felt at the mention of my great house, yet as i grew out of childhood, i was able to piece together disconnected fragments of discourse, let slip from the unwilling tongue which had begun to falter in approaching senility, that had a sort of relation to a certain circumstance which i had always deemed strange, but which now became dimly terrible. the circumstance to which i allude is the early age at which all the counts of my line had met their end. whilst i had hitherto considered this but a natural attribute of a family of shortlived men, i afterward pondered long upon these premature deaths, and began to connect them with the wanderings of the old man, who often spoke of a curse which for centuries had prevented the lives of the holders of my title from much exceeding the span of thirtytwo years. upon my twentyfirst birthday, the aged pierre gave to me a family document which he said had for many generations been handed down from father to son, and continued by each possessor. its contents were of the most startling nature, and its perusal confirmed the gravest of my apprehensions. at this time, my belief in the supernatural was firm and deepseated, else i should have dismissed with scorn the incredible narrative unfolded before my eyes. the paper carried me back to the days of the thirteenth century, when the old castle in which i sat had been a feared and impregnable fortress. it told of a certain ancient man who had once dwelled on our estates, a person of no small accomplishments, though little above the rank of peasant, by name, michel, usually designated by the surname of mauvais, the evil, on account of his sinister reputation. he had studied beyond the custom of his kind, seeking such things as the philosophers stone or the elixir of eternal life, and was reputed wise in the terrible secrets of black magic and alchemy. michel mauvais had one son, named charles, a youth as proficient as himself in the hidden arts, who had therefore been called le sorcier, or the wizard. this pair, shunned by all honest folk, were suspected of the most hideous practices. old michel was said to have burnt his wife alive as a sacrifice to the devil, and the unaccountable disappearance of many small peasant children was laid at the dreaded door of these two. yet through the dark natures of the father and son ran one redeeming ray of humanity; the evil old man loved his offspring with fierce intensity, whilst the youth had for his parent a more than filial affection. one night the castle on the hill was thrown into the wildest confusion by the vanishment of young godfrey, son to henri, the count. a searching party, headed by the frantic father, invaded the cottage of the sorcerers and there came upon old michel mauvais, busy over a huge and violently boiling cauldron. without certain cause, in the ungoverned madness of fury and despair, the count laid hands on the aged wizard, and ere he released his murderous hold, his victim was no more. meanwhile, joyful servants were proclaiming the finding of young godfrey in a distant and unused chamber of the great edifice, telling too late that poor michel had been killed in vain. as the count and his associates turned away from the lowly abode of the alchemist, the form of charles le sorcier appeared through the trees. the excited chatter of the menials standing about told him what had occurred, yet he seemed at first unmoved at his fathers fate. then, slowly advancing to meet the count, he pronounced in dull yet terrible accents the curse that ever afterward haunted the house of c. may neer a noble of thy murdrous line survive to reach a greater age than thine! spake he, when, suddenly leaping backwards into the black woods, he drew from his tunic a phial of colourless liquid which he threw into the face of his fathers slayer as he disappeared behind the inky curtain of the night. the count died without utterance, and was buried the next day, but little more than two and thirty years from the hour of his birth. no trace of the assassin could be found, though relentless bands of peasants scoured the neighboring woods and the meadowland around the hill. thus time and the want of a reminder dulled the memory of the curse in the minds of the late counts family, so that when godfrey, innocent cause of the whole tragedy and now bearing the title, was killed by an arrow whilst hunting at the age of thirtytwo, there were no thoughts save those of grief at his demise. but when, years afterward, the next young count, robert by name, was found dead in a nearby field of no apparent cause, the peasants told in whispers that their seigneur had but lately passed his thirtysecond birthday when surprised by early death. louis, son to robert, was found drowned in the moat at the same fateful age, and thus down through the centuries ran the ominous chronicle: henris, roberts, antoines, and armands snatched from happy and virtuous lives when little below the age of their unfortunate ancestor at his murder. that i had left at most but eleven years of further existence was made certain to me by the words which i had read. my life, previously held at small value, now became dearer to me each day, as i delved deeper and deeper into the mysteries of the hidden world of black magic. isolated as i was, modern science had produced no impression upon me, and i laboured as in the middle ages, as wrapt as had been old michel and young charles themselves in the acquisition of demonological and alchemical learning. yet read as i might, in no manner could i account for the strange curse upon my line. in unusually rational moments i would even go so far as to seek a natural explanation, attributing the early deaths of my ancestors to the sinister charles le sorcier and his heirs; yet, having found upon careful inquiry that there were no known descendants of the alchemist, i would fall back to occult studies, and once more endeavor to find a spell, that would release my house from its terrible burden. upon one thing i was absolutely resolved. i should never wed, for, since no other branch of my family was in existence, i might thus end the curse with myself. as i drew near the age of thirty, old pierre was called to the land beyond. alone i buried him beneath the stones of the courtyard about which he had loved to wander in life. thus was i left to ponder on myself as the only human creature within the great fortress, and in my utter solitude my mind began to cease its vain protest against the impending doom, to become almost reconciled to the fate which so many of my ancestors had met. much of my time was now occupied in the exploration of the ruined and abandoned halls and towers of the old chateau, which in youth fear had caused me to shun, and some of which old pierre had once told me had not been trodden by human foot for over four centuries. strange and awesome were many of the objects i encountered. furniture, covered by the dust of ages and crumbling with the rot of long dampness, met my eyes. cobwebs in a profusion never before seen by me were spun everywhere, and huge bats flapped their bony and uncanny wings on all sides of the otherwise untenanted gloom. of my exact age, even down to days and hours, i kept a most careful record, for each movement of the pendulum of the massive clock in the library told off so much of my doomed existence. at length i approached that time which i had so long viewed with apprehension. since most of my ancestors had been seized some little while before they reached the exact age of count henri at his end, i was every moment on the watch for the coming of the unknown death. in what strange form the curse should overtake me, i knew not; but i was resolved at least that it should not find me a cowardly or a passive victim. with new vigour i applied myself to my examination of the old chateau and its contents. it was upon one of the longest of all my excursions of discovery in the deserted portion of the castle, less than a week before that fatal hour which i felt must mark the utmost limit of my stay on earth, beyond which i could have not even the slightest hope of continuing to draw breath that i came upon the culminating event of my whole life. i had spent the better part of the morning in climbing up and down half ruined staircases in one of the most dilapidated of the ancient turrets. as the afternoon progressed, i sought the lower levels, descending into what appeared to be either a mediaeval place of confinement, or a more recently excavated storehouse for gunpowder. as i slowly traversed the nitreencrusted passageway at the foot of the last staircase, the paving became very damp, and soon i saw by the light of my flickering torch that a blank, waterstained wall impeded my journey. turning to retrace my steps, my eye fell upon a small trapdoor with a ring, which lay directly beneath my foot. pausing, i succeeded with difficulty in raising it, whereupon there was revealed a black aperture, exhaling noxious fumes which caused my torch to sputter, and disclosing in the unsteady glare the top of a flight of stone steps. as soon as the torch which i lowered into the repellent depths burned freely and steadily, i commenced my descent. the steps were many, and led to a narrow stoneflagged passage which i knew must be far underground. this passage proved of great length, and terminated in a massive oaken door, dripping with the moisture of the place, and stoutly resisting all my attempts to open it. ceasing after a time my efforts in this direction, i had proceeded back some distance toward the steps when there suddenly fell to my experience one of the most profound and maddening shocks capable of reception by the human mind. without warning, i heard the heavy door behind me creak slowly open upon its rusted hinges. my immediate sensations were incapable of analysis. to be confronted in a place as thoroughly deserted as i had deemed the old castle with evidence of the presence of man or spirit produced in my brain a horror of the most acute description. when at last i turned and faced the seat of the sound, my eyes must have started from their orbits at the sight that they beheld. there in the ancient gothic doorway stood a human figure. it was that of a man clad in a skullcap and long mediaeval tunic of dark colour. his long hair and flowing beard were of a terrible and intense black hue, and of incredible profusion. his forehead, high beyond the usual dimensions; his cheeks, deepsunken and heavily lined with wrinkles; and his hands, long, clawlike, and gnarled, were of such a deadly marblelike whiteness as i have never elsewhere seen in man. his figure, lean to the proportions of a skeleton, was strangely bent and almost lost within the voluminous folds of his peculiar garment. but strangest of all were his eyes, twin caves of abysmal blackness, profound in expression of understanding, yet inhuman in degree of wickedness. these were now fixed upon me, piercing my soul with their hatred, and rooting me to the spot whereon i stood. at last the figure spoke in a rumbling voice that chilled me through with its dull hollowness and latent malevolence. the language in which the discourse was clothed was that debased form of latin in use amongst the more learned men of the middle ages, and made familiar to me by my prolonged researches into the works of the old alchemists and demonologists. the apparition spoke of the curse which had hovered over my house, told me of my coming end, dwelt on the wrong perpetrated by my ancestor against old michel mauvais, and gloated over the revenge of charles le sorcier. he told how young charles has escaped into the night, returning in after years to kill godfrey the heir with an arrow just as he approached the age which had been his fathers at his assassination; how he had secretly returned to the estate and established himself, unknown, in the even then deserted subterranean chamber whose doorway now framed the hideous narrator, how he had seized robert, son of godfrey, in a field, forced poison down his throat, and left him to die at the age of thirtytwo, thus maintaing the foul provisions of his vengeful curse. at this point i was left to imagine the solution of the greatest mystery of all, how the curse had been fulfilled since that time when charles le sorcier must in the course of nature have died, for the man digressed into an account of the deep alchemical studies of the two wizards, father and son, speaking most particularly of the researches of charles le sorcier concerning the elixir which should grant to him who partook of it eternal life and youth. his enthusiasm had seemed for the moment to remove from his terrible eyes the black malevolence that had first so haunted me, but suddenly the fiendish glare returned and, with a shocking sound like the hissing of a serpent, the stranger raised a glass phial with the evident intent of ending my life as had charles le sorcier, six hundred years before, ended that of my ancestor. prompted by some preserving instinct of selfdefense, i broke through the spell that had hitherto held me immovable, and flung my now dying torch at the creature who menaced my existence. i heard the phial break harmlessly against the stones of the passage as the tunic of the strange man caught fire and lit the horrid scene with a ghastly radiance. the shriek of fright and impotent malice emitted by the wouldbe assassin proved too much for my already shaken nerves, and i fell prone upon the slimy floor in a total faint. when at last my senses returned, all was frightfully dark, and my mind, remembering what had occurred, shrank from the idea of beholding any more; yet curiosity overmastered all. who, i asked myself, was this man of evil, and how came he within the castle walls? why should he seek to avenge the death of michel mauvais, and how bad the curse been carried on through all the long centuries since the time of charles le sorcier? the dread of years was lifted from my shoulder, for i knew that he whom i had felled was the source of all my danger from the curse; and now that i was free, i burned with the desire to learn more of the sinister thing which had haunted my line for centuries, and made of my own youth one longcontinued nightmare. determined upon further exploration, i felt in my pockets for flint and steel, and lit the unused torch which i had with me. first of all, new light revealed the distorted and blackened form of the mysterious stranger. the hideous eyes were now closed. disliking the sight, i turned away and entered the chamber beyond the gothic door. here i found what seemed much like an alchemists laboratory. in one corner was an immense pile of shining yellow metal that sparkled gorgeously in the light of the torch. it may have been gold, but i did not pause to examine it, for i was strangely affected by that which i had undergone. at the farther end of the apartment was an opening leading out into one of the many wild ravines of the dark hillside forest. filled with wonder, yet now realizing how the man had obtained access to the chauteau, i proceeded to return. i had intended to pass by the remains of the stranger with averted face but, as i approached the body, i seemed to hear emanating from it a faint sound, as though life were not yet wholly extinct. aghast, i turned to examine the charred and shrivelled figure on the floor. then all at once the horrible eyes, blacker even than the seared face in which they were set, opened wide with an expression which i was unable to interpret. the cracked lips tried to frame words which i could not well understand. once i caught the name of charles le sorcier, and again i fancied that the words years and curse issued from the twisted mouth. still i was at a loss to gather the purport of his disconnnected speech. at my evident ignorance of his meaning, the pitchy eyes once more flashed malevolently at me, until, helpless as i saw my opponent to be, i trembled as i watched him. suddenly the wretch, animated with his last burst of strength, raised his piteous head from the damp and sunken pavement. then, as i remained, paralyzed with fear, he found his voice and in his dying breath screamed forth those words which have ever afterward haunted my days and nights. fool! he shrieked, can you not guess my secret? have you no brain whereby you may recognize the will which has through six long centuries fulfilled the dreadful curse upon the house? have i not told you of the great elixir of eternal life? know you not how the secret of alchemy was solved? i tell you, it is i! i! i! that have lived for six hundred years to maintain my revenge, for i am charles le sorcier! the most merciful thing in the world, i think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. we live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. the sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the light into the peace and safety of a new dark age. theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents. they have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism. but it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden eons which chills me when i think of it and maddens me when i dream of it. that glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated things in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor. i hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if i live, i shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. i think that the professor, too intented to keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him. as my greatuncles heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, i was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in boston. much of the material which i correlated will be later published by the american archaeological society, but there was one box which i found exceedingly puzzling, and which i felt much averse from showing to other eyes. it had been locked and i did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor carried in his pocket. then, indeed, i succeeded in opening it, but when i did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. for what could be the meaning of the queer clay basrelief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which i found? had my uncle, in his latter years become credulous of the most superficial impostures? i resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old mans peace of mind. the basrelief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for, although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. and writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much the papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations. above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evident pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature. it seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. if i say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, i shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. a pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shockingly frightful. behind the figure was a vague suggestions of a cyclopean architectural background. on the ocassion of the visit, ran the professors manuscript, the sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his hosts archeological knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics of the basrelief. he spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archeology. young wilcoxs rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which i have since found highly characteristic of him. he said, it is new, indeed, for i made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding tyre, or the contemplative sphinx, or gardengirdled babylon. it was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. there had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in new england for some years; and wilcoxs imagination had been keenly affected. upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great cyclopean cities of titan blocks and skyflung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror. hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters: cthulhu fhtagn. this verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed professor angell. he questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with frantic intensity the basrelief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his night clothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly over him. my uncle blamed his old age, wilcox afterwards said, for his slowness in recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body. when professor angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for future reports of dreams. this bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imaginery whose burden was always some terrible cyclopean vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonously in enigmatical senseimpacts uninscribable save as gibberish. the two sounds frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters cthulhu and rlyeh. he at no time fully described this object but occasional frantic words, as repeated by dr. tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dreamsculpture. reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young mans subsidence into lethargy. his temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder. ii. the tale of inspector legrasse. the older matters which had made the sculptors dream and basrelief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript. once before, it appears, professor angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as cthulhu; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connexion that it is small wonder he pursued young wilcox with queries and demands for data. the chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplacelooking middleaged man who had travelled all the way from new orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any local source. his name was john raymond legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of police. with him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determine. it must not be fancied that inspector legrasse had the least interest in archaeology. on the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional considerations. the statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of new orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realise that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the african voodoo circles. of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountainhead. inspector legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering created. one sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. no recognised school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface of unplaceable stone. the figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship. it represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopuslike head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubberylooking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. this thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. the tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubledup, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way clown toward the bottom of the pedestal. the cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the crouchers elevated knees. the aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown. its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did it shew with any known type of art belonging to civilisations youth or indeed to any other time. totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenishblack stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. the characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of half the worlds expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. they, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it. something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no part. and yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the inspectors problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. this person was the late william channing webb, professor of anthropology in princeton university, and an explorer of no slight note. professor webb had been engaged, fortyeight years before, in a tour of greenland and iceland in search of some runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the west greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devilworship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. it was a faith of which other esquimaux knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient aeons before ever the world was made. besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this professor webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizardpriest, expressing the sounds in roman letters as best he knew how. but just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs. it was, the professor stated, a very crude basrelief of stone, comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. and so far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting. this data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to inspector legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant with questions. having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cultworshippers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist esquimaux. there then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. what, in substance, both the esquimaux wizards and the louisiana swamppriests had chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this: the worddivisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud: phnglui mglwnafh cthulhu rlyeh wgahnagl fhtagn. legrasse had one point in advance of professor webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant. this text, as given, ran something like this: in his house at rlyeh dead cthulhu waits dreaming. and now, in response to a general and urgent demand, inspector legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a story to which i could see my uncle attached profound significance. it savoured of the wildest dreams of mythmaker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such halfcastes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it. so a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. at the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came. ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragment of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to create. at length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns. the muffled beat of tomtoms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. a reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through pale undergrowth beyond the endless avenues of forest night. reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused pointblank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so inspector legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before. the region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. there were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered that batwinged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. they said it had been there before diberville, before la salle, before the indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. it was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. but it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away. the present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents. only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by legrasses men as they ploughed on through the black morass toward the red glare and muffled tomtoms. there are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other. animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstacies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. now and then the less organized ululation would cease, and from what seemed a welldrilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsong chant that hideous phrase or ritual: phnglui mglwnafh cthulhu rlyeh wgahnagl fhtagn. then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror. in a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acres extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. on this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a sime or an angarola could paint. void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and writhing about a monstrous ringshaped bonfire; in the centre of which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette. from a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flamegirt monolith as a centre hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared. it was inside this circle that the ring of worshippers jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless bacchanal between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire. it may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror. this man, joseph d. galvez, i later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. he indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees but i suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition. actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout. for five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end legrasse was able to count some fortyseven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellowprisoners. the image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by legrasse. examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixedblooded, and mentally aberrant type. most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely west indians or brava portuguese from the cape verde islands, gave a colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. but before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved. degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprising consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith. they worshipped, so they said, the great old ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. those old ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had never died. this was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of rlyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway. some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him. meanwhile no more must be told. there was a secret which even torture could not extract. mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few. but these were not the great old ones. no man had ever seen the old ones. the carven idol was great cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him. no one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth. the chanted ritual was not the secret that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. the chant meant only this: in his house at rlyeh dead cthulhu waits dreaming. only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to various institutions. all denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by black winged ones which had come to them from their immemorial meetingplace in the haunted wood. but of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. what the police did extract, came mainly from the immensely aged mestizo named castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of china. old castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. there had been aeons when other things ruled on the earth, and they had had great cities. remains of them, he said the deathless chinamen had told him, were still be found as cyclopean stones on islands in the pacific. they all died vast epochs of time before men came, but there were arts which could revive them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity. they had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought their images with them. these great old ones, castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood. they had shape for did not this starfashioned image prove it? but that shape was not made of matter. when the stars were right, they could plunge from world to world through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, they could not live. but although they no longer lived, they would never really die. they all lay in stone houses in their great city of rlyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty cthulhu for a glorious surrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready for them. but at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate their bodies. the spells that preserved them intact likewise prevented them from making an initial move, and they could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by. they knew all that was occurring in the universe, for their mode of speech was transmitted thought. even now they talked in their tombs. when, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the great old ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for only thus could their language reach the fleshly minds of mammals. then, whispered castro, those first men formed the cult around tall idols which the great ones shewed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars. that cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great cthulhu from his tomb to revive his subjects and resume his rule of earth. the time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the great old ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and revelling in joy. then the liberated old ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom. meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return. in the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed old ones in dreams, but then something happened. the great stone city rlyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchres, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse. but memory never died, and the highpriests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right. then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up in caverns beneath forgotten seabottoms. but of them old castro dared not speak much. he cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. the size of the old ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. of the cult, he said that he thought the centre lay amid the pathless desert of arabia, where irem, the city of pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. it was not allied to the european witchcult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members. no book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless chinamen said that there were double meanings in the necronomicon of the mad arab abdul alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the muchdiscussed couplet: that is not dead which can eternal lie, and with strange aeons even death may die. legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. the authorities at tulane university could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the greenland tale of professor webb. the feverish interest aroused at the meeting by legrasses tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publications of the society. caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. legrasse for some time lent the image to professor webb, but at the latters death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where i viewed it not long ago. it is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dreamsculpture of young wilcox. that my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor i did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and exact hieroglyphics of the swampfound image and the greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by esquimaux diabolists and mongrel louisianans?. professor angells instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was eminently natural; though privately i suspected young wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncles expense. the dreamnarratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what i thought the most sensible conclusions. so, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of legrasse, i made a trip to providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke i thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man. wilcox still lived alone in the fleurdelys building in thomas street, a hideous victorian imitation of seventeenth century breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely olonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest georgian steeple in america, i found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. he will, i believe, some time be heard from as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallised in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and phantasies which arthur machen evokes in prose, and clark ashton smith makes visible in verse and in painting. dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising. then i told him who i was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study. i did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out. in a short time i became convinced ofhis absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. they and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion. he could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own dream basrelief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands. it was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. that he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncles relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again i strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions. he talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with terrible vividness the damp cyclopean city of slimy green stone whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, halfmental calling from underground: cthulhu fhtagn, cthulhu fhtagn. these words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead cthulhus dreamvigil in his stone vault at rlyeh, and i felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. wilcox, i was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the basrelief, and in the terrible statue i now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. the youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly illmannered, which i could never like, but i was willing enough now to admit both his genius and his honesty. i took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent promises. the matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times i had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connexions. i visited new orleans, talked with legrasse and others of that oldtime raidingparty, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived. old castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. what i now heard so graphically at firsthand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for i felt sure that i was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. my attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as l wish it still were, and i discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by professor angell. one thing i began to suspect, and which i now fear i know, is that my uncles death was far from natural. he fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. i did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cultmembers in louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn of secret methods and rites and beliefs. legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptors data have come to sinister ears?. i think professor angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much. whether i shall go as he did remains to be seen, for i have learned much now. iii. the madness from the sea i had largely given over my inquiries into what professor angell called the cthulhu cult, and was visiting a learned friend in paterson, new jersey; the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note. examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones. it was the sydney bulletin i have mentioned, for my friend had wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a halftone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which legrasse had found in the swamp. eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, i scanned the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. what it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest; and i carefully tore it out for immediate action. it read as follows: mystery derelict found at sea vigilant arrives with helpless armed new zealand yacht in tow. one survivor and dead man found aboard. tale of desperate battle and deaths at sea. rescued seaman refuses particulars of strange experience. odd idol found in his possession. inquiry to follow. this was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of ideas it started in my mind! here were new treasuries of data on the cthulhu cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land. what motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol? what was the unknown island on which six of the emmas crew had died, and about which the mate johansen was so secretive? what had the viceadmiraltys investigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in dunedin? and most marvellous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle? that evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, i bade my host adieu and took a train for san francisco. in less than a month i was in dunedin; where, however, i found that little was known of the strange cultmembers who had lingered in the old seataverns. waterfront scum was far too common for special mentnon; though there was vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills. in auckland i learned that johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in west street and sailed with his wife to his old home in oslo. of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his oslo address. after that i went to sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of the viceadmiralty court. i saw the alert, now sold and in commercial use, at circular quay in sydney cove, but gained nothing from its noncommittal bulk. the crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the museum at hyde park; and i studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material which i had noted in legrasses smaller specimen. geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it. then i thought with a shudder of what old castro had told legrasse about the old ones; they had come from the stars, and had brought their images with them. shaken with such a mental revolution as i had never before known, i now resolved to visit mate johansen in oslo. sailing for london, i reembarked at once for the norwegian capital; and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the egeberg. johansens address, i discovered, lay in the old town of king harold haardrada, which kept alive the name of oslo during all the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as christiana. i made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front. a sadfaced woman in black answered my summons, and i was stung th disappointment when she told me in halting english that gustaf johansen was no more. it was a simple, rambling thing a naive sailors effort at a postfacto diary and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. i cannot attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance, but i will tell its gist enough to shew why the sound the water against the vessels sides became so unendurable to me that i stopped my ears with cotton. johansen, thank god, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the thing, but i shall never sleep calmly again when i think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them upon the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air. i suppose that only a single mountaintop, the hideous monolithcrowned citadel whereon great cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. when i think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there i almost wish to kill myself forthwith. johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet. awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and basreliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the alert, is poignantly visible in every line of the mates frightened description. without knowing what futurism is like, johansen achieved something very close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite structure or building, he dwells only on broad impressions of vast angles and stone surfaces surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper for this earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. i mention his talk about angles because it suggests something wilcox had told me of his awful dreams. he said that the geometry of the dreamplace he saw was abnormal, noneuclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours. now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible reality. johansen and his men landed at a sloping mudbank on this monstrous acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase. the very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarising miasma welling out from this seasoaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance shewed concavity after the first shewed convexity. something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only halfheartedly that they searched vainly, as it proved for some portable souvenir to bear away. it was rodriguez the portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found. the rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squiddragon basrelief. it was, johansen said, like a great barndoor; and they all felt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trapdoor or slantwise like an outside cellardoor. as wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. one could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed phantasmally variable. briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. then donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went. he climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast. then, very softly and slowly, the acregreat lintel began to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was balauced donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal. in this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset. the aperture was black with a darkness almost material. that tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its aeonlong imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. the odour rising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quickeared hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when it lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness. poor johansens handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant. the thing cannot be described there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order. a mountain walked or stumbled. god! what wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant? the thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own. the stars were right again, and what an ageold cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. after vigintillions of years great cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight. three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. god rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. they were donovan, guerrera, and angstrom. parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas of greencrusted rock to the boat, and johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldnt have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse. so only briden and johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated, floundering at the edge of the water. steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the alert under way. slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of odysseus. then, bolder than the storied cyclops, great cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast waveraising strokes of cosmic potency. briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst johansen was wandering deliriously. but johansen had not given out yet. knowing that the thing could surely overtake the alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightninglike on deck and reversed the wheel. there was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon. the awful squidhead with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but johansen drove on relentlessly. there was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler could not put on paper. for an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern; where god in heaven! the scattered plasticity of that nameless skyspawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the alert gained impetus from its mounting steam. out of that dream came rescuethe vigilant, the viceadmiralty court, the streets of dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the egeberg. he could not tell they would think him mad. he would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess. death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories. that was the document i read, and now i have placed it in the tin box beside the basrelief and the papers of professor angell. with it shall go this record of mine this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which i hope may never be pieced together again. i have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. but i do not think my life will be long. as my uncle went, as poor johansen went, so i shall go. i know too much, and the cult still lives. cthulhu still lives, too, i suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded him since the sun was young. his accursed city is sunken once more, for the vigilant sailed over the spot after the april storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idolcapped monoliths in lonely places. he must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. who knows the end? what has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men. a time will come but i must not and cannot think! let me pray that, if i do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye. there was thunder in the air on the night i went to the deserted mansion atop tempest mountain to find the lurking fear. i was not alone, for foolhardiness was not then mixed with that love of the grotesque and the terrible which has made my career a series of quests for strange horrors in literature and in life. with me were two faithful and muscular men for whom i had sent when the time came; men long associated with me in my ghastly explorations because of their peculiar fitness. we had started quietly from the village because of the reporters who still lingered about after the eldritch panic of a month before the nightmare creeping death. later, i thought, they might aid me; but i did not want them then. would to god i had let them share the search, that i might not have had to bear the secret alone so long; to bear it alone for fear the world would call me mad or go mad itself at the demon implications of the thing. now that i am telling it anyway, lest the brooding make me a maniac, i wish i had never concealed it. for i, and i only, know what manner of fear lurked on that spectral and desolate mountain. in a small motorcar we covered the miles of primeval forest and hill until the wooded ascent checked it. the country bore an aspect more than usually sinister as we viewed it by night and without the accustomed crowds of investigators, so that we were often tempted to use the acetylene headlight despite the attention it might attract. it was not a wholesome landscape after dark, and i believe i would have noticed its morbidity even had i been ignorant of the terror that stalked there. of wild creatures there were nonethey are wise when death leers close. the ancient lightningscarred trees seemed unnaturally large and twisted, and the other vegetation unnaturally thick and feverish, while curious mounds and hummocks in the weedy, fulguritepitted earth reminded me of snakes and dead mens skulls swelled to gigantic proportions. fear had lurked on tempest mountain for more than a century. this i learned at once from newspaper accounts of the catastrophe which first brought the region to the worlds notice. the place is a remote, lonely elevation in that part of the catskills where dutch civilization once feebly and transiently penetrated, leaving behind as it receded only a few mined mansions and a degenerate squatter population inhabiting pitiful hamlets on isolated slopes. normal beings seldom visited the locality till the state police were formed, and even now only infrequent troopers patrol it. the fear, however, is an old tradition throughout the neighboring villages; since it is a prime topic in the simple discourse of the poor mongrels who sometimes leave their valleys to trade handwoven baskets for such primitive necessities as they cannot shoot, raise, or make. the lurking fear dwelt in the shunned and deserted martense mansion, which crowned the high but gradual eminence whose liability to frequent thunderstorms gave it the name of tempest mountain. for over a hundred years the antique, grovecircled stone house had been the subject of stories incredibly wild and monstrously hideous; stories of a silent colossal creeping death which stalked abroad in summer. with whimpering insistence the squatters told tales of a demon which seized lone wayfarers after dark, either carrying them off or leaving them in a frightful state of gnawed dismemberment; while sometimes they whispered of blood trails toward the distant mansion. some said the thunder called the lurking fear out of its habitation, while others said the thunder was its voice. no one outside the backwoods had believed these varying and conflicting stories, with their incoherent, extravagant descriptions of the hallglimpsed fiend; yet not a farmer or villager doubted that the martense mansion was ghoulishly haunted. local history forbade such a doubt, although no ghostly evidence was ever found by such investigators as had visited the building after some especially vivid tale of the squatters. grandmothers told strange myths of the martense spectre; myths concerning the martense family itself, its queer hereditary dissimilarity of eyes, its long, unnatural annals, and the murder which had cursed it. the terror which brought me to the scene was a sudden and portentous confirmation of the mountaineers wildest legends. one summer night, after a thunderstorm of unprecedented violence, the countryside was aroused by a squatter stampede which no mere delusion could create. the pitiful throngs of natives shrieked and whined of the unnamable horror which had descended upon them, and they were not doubted. they had not seen it, but had heard such cries from one of their hamlets that they knew a creeping death had come. in the morning citizens and state troopers followed the shuddering mountaineers to the place where they said the death had come. death was indeed there. the ground under one of the squatters villages had caved in after a lightning stroke, destroying several of the malodorous shanties; but upon this property damage was superimposed an organic devastation which paled it to insignificance. of a possible seventyfive natives who had inhabited this spot, not one living specimen was visible. the disordered earth was covered with blood and human debris bespeaking too vividly the ravages of demon teeth and talons; yet no visible trail led away from the carnage. that some hideous animal must be the cause, everyone quickly agreed; nor did any tongue now revive the charge that such cryptic deaths formed merely the sordid murders common in decadent communities. that charge was revived only when about twentyfive of the estimated population were found missing from the dead; and even then it was hard to explain the murder of fifty by half that number. but the fact remained that on a summer night a bolt had come out of the heavens and left a dead village whose corpses were horribly mangled, chewed, and clawed. the excited countryside immediately connected the horror with the haunted martense mansion, though the localities were over three miles apart. the troopers were more skeptical; including the mansion only casually in their investigations, and dropping it altogether when they found it thoroughly deserted. country and village people, however i canvassed the place with infinite care; overturning everything in the house, sounding ponds and brooks, beating down bushes, and ransacking the nearby forests. all was in vain; the death that had come had left no trace save destruction itself. so on this summer night, while distant thunder rumbled, i left a silent motorcar and tramped with two armed companions up the last moundcovered reaches of tempest mountain, casting the beams of an electric torch on the spectral grey walls that began to appear through giant oaks ahead. in this morbid night solitude and feeble shifting illumination, the vast boxlike pile displayed obscure hints of terror which day could not uncover; yet i did not hesitate, since i had come with fierce resolution to test an idea. i believed that the thunder called the deathdemon out of some fearsome secret place; and be that demon solid entity or vaporous pestilence, i meant to see it. i had thoroughly searched the ruin before, hence knew my plan well; choosing as the seat of my vigil the old room of jan martense, whose murder looms so great in the rural legends. i felt subtly that the apartment of this ancient victim was best for my purposes. the chamber, measuring about twenty feet square, contained like the other rooms some rubbish which had once been furniture. it lay on the second story, on the southeast corner of the house, and had an immense east window and narrow south window, both devoid of panes or shutters. opposite the large window was an enormous dutch fireplace with scriptural tiles representing the prodigal son, and opposite the narrow window was a spacious bed built into the wall. as the treemuffled thunder grew louder, i arranged my plans details. first i fastened side by side to the ledge of the large window three rope ladders which i had brought with me. i knew they reached a suitable spot on the grass outside, for i had tested them. then the three of us dragged from another room a wide fourposter bedstead, crowding it laterally against the window. having strewn it with fir boughs, all now rested on it with drawn automatics, two relaxing while the third watched. from whatever direction the demon might come, our potential escape was provided. if it came from within the house, we had the window ladders; if from outside the door and the stairs. we did not think, judging from precedent, that it would pursue us far even at worst. i watched from midnight to one oclock, when in spite of the sinister house, the unprotected window, and the approaching thunder and lightning, i felt singularly drowsy. i was between my two companions, george bennett being toward the window and william tobey toward the fireplace. bennett was asleep, having apparently felt the same anomalous drowsiness which affected me, so i designated tobey for the next watch although even he was nodding. it is curious how intently i had been watching the fireplace. the increasing thunder must have affected my dreams, for in the brief time i slept there came to me apocalyptic visions. once i partly awaked, probably because the sleeper toward the window had restlessly flung an arm across my chest. i was not sufficiently awake to see whether tobey was attending to his duties as sentinel, but felt a distinct anxiety on that score. never before had the presence of evil so poignantly oppressed me. later i must have dropped asleep again, for it was out of a phantasmal chaos that my mind leaped when the night grew hideous with shrieks beyond anything in my former experience or imagination. in that shrieking the inmost soul of human fear and agony clawed hopelessly and insanely at the ebony gates of oblivion. i awoke to red madness and the mockery of diabolism, as farther and farther down inconceivable vistas that phobic and crystalline anguish retreated and reverberated. there was no light, but i knew from the empty space at my right that tobey was gone, god alone knew whither. across my chest still lay the heavy arm of the sleeper at my left. then came the devastating stroke of lightning which shook the whole mountain, lit the darkest crypts of the hoary grove, and splintered the patriarch of the twisted trees. in the demon flash of a monstrous fireball the sleeper started up suddenly while the glare from beyond the window threw his shadow vividly upon the chimney above the fireplace from which my eyes had never strayed. that i am still alive and sane, is a marvel i cannot fathom. i cannot fathom it, for the shadow on that chimney was not that of george bennett or of any other human creature, but a blasphemous abnormality from hells nethermost craters; a nameless, shapeless abomination which no mind could fully grasp and no pen even partly describe. in another second i was alone in the accursed mansion, shivering and gibbering. george bennett and william tobey had left no trace, not even of a struggle. they were never heard of again. ii. a passer in the storm for days after that hideous experience in the forestswathed mansion i lay nervously exhausted in my hotel room at lefferts corners. i do not remember exactly how i managed to reach the motorcar, start it, and slip unobserved back to the village; for i retain no distinct impression save of wildarmed titan trees, demoniac mutterings of thunder, and charonian shadows athwart the low mounds that dotted and streaked the region. as i shivered and brooded on the casting of that brainblasting shadow, i knew that i had at last pried out one of earths supreme horrors one of those nameless blights of outer voids whose faint demon scratchings we sometimes hear on the farthest rim of space, yet from which our own finite vision has given us a merciful immunity. the shadow i had seen, i hardly dared to analyse or identify. something had lain between me and the window that night, but i shuddered whenever i could not cast off the instinct to classify it. if it had only snarled, or bayed, or laughed titteringlyeven that would have relieved the abysmal hideousness. but it was so silent. it had rested a heavy arm or foreleg on my chest... obviously it was organic, or had once been organic... jan martense, whose room i had invaded, was buried in the graveyard near the mansion... i must find bennett and tobey, if they lived... why had it picked them, and left me for the last?... drowsiness is so stifling, and dreams are so horrible... in a short time i realised that i must tell my story to someone or break down completely. i had already decided not to abandon the quest for the lurking fear, for in my rash ignorance it seemed to me that uncertainty was worse than enlightenment, however terrible the latter might prove to be. accordingly i resolved in my mind the best course to pursue; whom to select for my confidences, and how to track down the thing which had obliterated two men and cast a nightmare shadow. my chief acquaintances at lefferts corners had been the affable reporters, of whom several had still remained to collect final echoes of the tragedy. it was from these that i determined to choose a colleague, and the more i reflected the more my preference inclined toward one arthur munroe, a dark, lean man of about thirtyfive, whose education, taste, intelligence, and temperament all seemed to mark him as one not bound to conventional ideas and experiences. on an afternoon in early september, arthur munroe listened to my story. i saw from the beginning that he was both interested and sympathetic, and when i had finished he analysed and discussed the thing with the greatest shrewdness and judgement. his advice, moreover, was eminently practical; for he recommended a postponement of operations at the martense mansion until we might become fortified with more detailed historical and geographical data. on his initiative we combed the countryside for information regarding the terrible martense family, and discovered a man who possessed a marvelously illuminating ancestral diary. we also talked at length with such of the mountain mongrels as had not fled from the terror and confusion to remoter slopes, and slope again scanned for dens and caves, but all without result. and yet, as i have said, vague new fears hovered menacingly over us; as if giant batwinged gryphons looked on transcosmic gulfs. as the afternoon advanced, it became increasingly difficult to see; and we heard the rumble of a thunderstorm gathering over tempest mountain. this sound in such a locality naturally stirred us, though less than it would have done at night. as it was, we hoped desperately that the storm would last until well after dark; and with that hope turned from our aimless hillside searching toward the nearest inhabited hamlet to gather a body of squatters as helpers in the investigation. timid as they were, a few of the younger men were sufficiently inspired by our protective leadership to promise such help. we had hardly more than turned, however, when there descended such a blinding sheet of torrential rain that shelter became imperative. the extreme, almost nocturnal darkness of the sky caused us to stumble badly, but guided by the frequent flashes of lightning and by our minute knowledge of the hamlet we soon reached the least porous cabin of the lot; an heterogeneous combination of logs and boards whose still existing door and single tiny window both faced maple hill. barring the door after us against the fury of the wind and rain, we put in place the crude window shutter which our frequent searches had taught us where to find. it was dismal sitting there on rickety boxes in the pitchy darkness, but we smoked pipes and occasionally flashed our pocket lamps about. now and then we could see the lightning through cracks in the wall; the afternoon was so incredibly dark that each flash was extremely vivid. the stormy vigil reminded me shudderingly of my ghastly night on tempest mountain. my mind turned to that odd question which had kept recurring ever since the nightmare thing had happened; and again i wondered why the demon, approaching the three watchers either from the window or the interior, had begun with the men on each side and left the middle man till the last, when the titan fireball had scared it away. why had it not taken its victims in natural order, with myself second, from whichever direction it had approached? with what manner of farreaching tentacles did it prey? or did it know that i was the leader, and saved me for a fate worse than that of my companions? in the midst of these reflections, as if dramatically arranged to intensify them, there fell nearby a terrific bolt of lightning followed by the sound of sliding earth. at the same time the wolfish wind rose to demoniac crescendos of ululation. we were sure that the one tree on maple hill had been struck again, and munroe rose from his box and went to the tiny window to ascertain the damage. when he took down the shutter the wind, and rain howled deafeningly in, so that i could not hear what he said; but i waited while he leaned out and tried to fathom natures pandemonium. gradually a calming of the wind and dispersal of the unusual darkness told of the storms passing. i had hoped it would last into the night to help our quest, but a furtive sunbeam from a knothole behind me removed the likelihood of such a thing. suggesting to munroe that we had better get some light even if more showers came, i unbarred and opened the crude door. the ground outside was a singular mass of mud and pools, with fresh heaps of earth from the slight landslide; but i saw nothing to justify the interest which kept my companion silently leaning out the window. crossing to where he leaned, i touched his shoulder; but he did not move. then, as i playfully shook him and turned him around, i felt the strangling tendrils of a cancerous horror whose roots reached into illimitable pasts and fathomless abysms of the night that broods beyond time. for arthur munroe was dead. and on what remained of his chewed and gouged head there was no longer a face. iii. what the red glare meant the scene of my excavations would alone have been enough to unnerve any ordinary man. baleful primal trees of unholy size, age, and grotesqueness leered above me like the pillars of some hellish druidic temple; muffling the thunder, hushing the clawing wind, and admitting but little rain. beyond the scarred trunks in the background, illumined by faint flashes of filtered lightning, rose the damp ivied stones of the deserted mansion, while somewhat nearer was the abandoned dutch garden whose walks and beds were polluted by a white, fungous, foetid, overnourished vegetation that never saw full daylight. and nearest of all was the graveyard, where deformed trees tossed insane branches as their roots displaced unhallowed slabs and sucked venom from what lay below. now and then, beneath the brown pall of leaves that rotted and festered in the antediluvian forest darkness, i could trace the sinister outlines of some of those low mounds which characterized the lightningpierced region. of gerrit martenses descendants less is known than of himself; since they were all reared in hatred of the english civilisation, and trained to shun such of the colonists as accepted it. their life was exceedingly secluded, and people declared that their isolation had made them heavy of speech and comprehension. in appearance all were marked by a peculiar inherited dissimilarity of eyes; one generally being blue and the other brown. their social contacts grew fewer and fewer, till at last they took to intermarrying with the numerous menial class about the estate. many of the crowded family degenerated, moved across the valley, and merged with the mongrel population which was later to produce the pitiful squatters. the rest had stuck sullenly to their ancestral mansion, becoming more and more clannish and taciturn, yet developing a nervous responsiveness to the frequent thunderstorms. there were no skeletons about, so that departure rather than death was inferred. the clan seemed to have left several years before, and improvised penthouses showed how numerous it had grown prior to its migration. its cultural level had fallen very low, as proved by decaying furniture and scattered silverware which must have been long abandoned when its owners left. but though the dreaded martenses were gone, the fear of the haunted house continued; and grew very acute when new and strange stories arose among the mountain decadents. there it stood; deserted, feared, and linked with the vengeful ghost of jan martense. there it still stood on the night i dug in jan martenses grave. i have described my protracted digging as idiotic, and such it indeed was in object and method. the coffin of jan martense had soon been unearthedit now held only dust and nitre but in my fury to exhume his ghost i delved irrationally and clumsily down beneath where he had lain. god knows what i expected to findi only felt that i was digging in the grave of a man whose ghost stalked by night. it is impossible to say what monstrous depth i had attained when my spade, and soon my feet, broke through the ground beneath. the event, under the circumstances, was tremendous; for in the existence of a subterranean space here, my mad theories had terrible confirmation. my slight fall had extinguished the lantern, but i produced an electric pocket lamp and viewed the small horizontal tunnel which led away indefinitely in both directions. it was amply large enough for a man to wriggle through; and though no sane person would have tried at that time, i forgot danger, reason, and cleanliness in my singleminded fever to unearth the lurking fear. choosing the direction toward the house, i scrambled recklessly into the narrow burrow; squirming ahead blindly and rapidly, and flashing but seldom the lamp i kept before me. what language can describe the spectacle of a man lost in infinitely abysmal earth; pawing, twisting, wheezing; scrambling madly through sunken convolutions of immemorial blackness without an idea of time, safety, direction, or definite object? there is something hideous in it, but that is what i did. i did it for so long that life faded to a far memory, and i became one with the moles and grubs of nighted depths. indeed, it was only by accident that after interminable writhings i jarred my forgotten electric lamp alight, so that it shone eerily along the burrow of caked loam that stretched and curved ahead. i had been scrambling in this way for some time, so that my battery had burned very low, when the passage suddenly inclined sharply upward, altering my mode of progress. and as i raised my glance it was without preparation that i saw glistening in the distance two demoniac reflections of my expiring lamp; two reflections glowing with a baneful and unmistakable effulgence, and provoking maddeningly nebulous memories. i stopped automatically, though lacking the brain to retreat. the eyes approached, yet of the thing that bore them i could distinguish only a claw. but what a claw! then far overhead i heard a faint crashing which i recognized. it was the wild thunder of the mountain, raised to hysteric fury i must have been crawling upward for some time, so that the surface was now quite near. and as the muffled thunder clattered, those eyes still stared with vacuous viciousness. thank god i did not then know what it was, else i should have died. but i was saved by the very thunder that had summoned it, for after a hideous wait there burst from the unseen outside sky one of those frequent mountainward bolts whose aftermath i had noticed here and there as gashes of disturbed earth and fulgurites of various sizes. with cyclopean rage it tore through the soil above that damnable pit, blinding and deafening me, yet not wholly reducing me to a coma. in the chaos of sliding, shifting earth i clawed and floundered helplessly till the rain on my head steadied me and i saw that i had come to the surface in a familiar spot; a steep unforested place on the southwest slope of the mountain. recurrent sheet lightnings illumed the tumbled ground and the remains of the curious low hummock which had stretched down from the wooded higher slope, but there was nothing in the chaos to show my place of egress from the lethal catacomb. my brain was as great a chaos as the earth, and as a distant red glare burst on the landscape from the south i hardly realised the horror i had been through. but when two days later the squatters told me what the red glare meant, i felt more horror than that which the mouldburrow and the claw and eyes had given; more horror because of the overwhelming implications. in a hamlet twenty miles away an orgy of fear had followed the bolt which brought me above ground, and a nameless thing had dropped from an overhanging tree into a weakroofed cabin. it had done a deed, but the squatters had fired the cabin in frenzy before it could escape. it had been doing that deed at the very moment the earth caved in on the thing with the claw and eyes. iv. the horror in the eyes there can be nothing normal in the mind of one who, knowing what i knew of the horrors of tempest mountain, would seek alone for the fear that lurked there. that at least two of the fears embodiments were destroyed, formed but a slight guarantee of mental and physical safety in this acheron of multiform diabolism; yet i continued my quest with even greater zeal as events and revelations became more monstrous. when, two days after my frightful crawl through that crypt of the eyes and claw, i learned that a thing had malignly hovered twenty miles away at the same instant the eyes were glaring at me, i experienced virtual convulsions of fright. but that fright was so mixed with wonder and alluring grotesqueness, that it was almost a pleasant sensation. sometimes, in the throes of a nightmare when unseen powers whirl one over the roofs of strange dead cities toward the grinning chasm of nis, it is a relief and even a delight to shriek wildly and throw oneself voluntarily along with the hideous vortex of dreamdoom into whatever bottomless gulf may yawn. and so it was with the walking nightmare of tempest mountain; the discovery that two monsters had haunted the spot gave me ultimately a mad craving to plunge into the very earth of the accursed region, and with bare hands dig out the death that leered from every inch of the poisonous soil. as soon as possible i visited the grave of jan martense and dug vainly where i had dug before. some extensive cavein had obliterated all trace of the underground passage, while the rain had washed so much earth back into the excavation that i could not tell how deeply i had dug that other day. i likewise made a difficult trip to the distant hamlet where the deathcreature had been burnt, and was little repaid for my trouble. in the ashes of the fateful cabin i found several bones, but apparently none of the monsters. the squatters said the thing had had only one victim; but in this i judged them inaccurate, since besides the complete skull of a human being, there was another bony fragment which seemed certainly to have belonged to a human skull at some time. though the rapid drop of the monster had been seen, no one could say just what the creature was like; those who had glimpsed it called it simply a devil. examining the great tree where it had lurked, i could discern no distinctive marks. i tried to find some trail into the black forest, but on this occasion could not stand the sight of those morbidly large boles, or of those vast serpentlike roots that twisted so malevolently before they sank into the earth. the afternoon of my search brought nothing to light, and dusk came as i stood on maple hill looking down at the hamlet and across the valley to tempest mountain. there had been a gorgeous sunset, and now the moon came up, nearly full and shedding a silver flood over the plain, the distant mountainside, and the curious low mounds that rose here and there. it was a peaceful arcadian scene, but knowing what it hid i hated it. i hated the mocking moon, the hypocritical plain, the festering mountain, and those sinister mounds. everything seemed to me tainted with a loathsome contagion, and inspired by a noxious alliance with distorted hidden powers. presently, as i gazed abstractedly at the moonlit panorama, my eye became attracted by something singular in the nature and arrangement of a certain topographical element. without having any exact knowledge of geology, i had from the first been interested in the odd mounds and hummocks of the region. i had noticed that they were pretty widely distributed around tempest mountain, though less numerous on the plain than near the hilltop itself, where prehistoric glaciation had doubtless found feebler opposition to its striking and fantastic caprices. now, in the light of that low moon which cast long weird shadows, it struck me forcibly that the various points and lines of the mound system had a peculiar relation to the summit of tempest mountain. that summit was undeniably a centre from which the lines or rows of points radiated indefinitely and irregularly, as if the unwholesome martense mansion had thrown visible tentacles of terror. the idea of such tentacles gave me an unexplained thrill, and i stopped to analyse my reason for believing these mounds glacial phenomena. the more i analysed the less i believed, and against my newly opened mind there began to beat grotesque and horrible analogies based on superficial aspects and upon my experience beneath the earth. before i knew it i was uttering frenzied and disjointed words to myself; my god!... molehills... the damned place must be honeycombed... how many... that night at the mansion... they took bennett and tobey first... on each side of us... then i was digging frantically into the mound which had stretched nearest me; digging desperately, shiveringly, but almost jubilantly; digging and at last shrieking aloud with some unplaced emotion as i came upon a tunnel or burrow just like the one through which i had crawled on the other demoniac night. after that i recall running, spade in hand; a hideous run across moonlitten, moundmarked meadows and through diseased, precipitous abysses of haunted hillside forest; leaping screaming, panting, bounding toward the terrible martense mansion. i recall digging unreasonably in all parts of the brierchoked cellar; digging to find the core and centre of that malignant universe of mounds. and then i recall how i laughed when i stumbled on the passageway; the hole at the base of the old chimney, where the thick weeds grew and cast queer shadows in the light of the lone candle i had happened to have with me. what still remained down in that hellhive, lurking and waiting for the thunder to arouse it, i did not know. two had been killed; perhaps that had finished it. but still there remained that burning determination to reach the innermost secret of the fear, which i had once more come to deem definite, material, and organic. my indecisive speculation whether to explore the passage alone and immediately with my pocketlight or to try to assemble a band of squatters for the quest, was interrupted after a time by a sudden rush of wind from the outside which blew out the candle and left me in stark blackness. the moon no longer shone through the chinks and apertures above me, and with a sense of fateful alarm i heard the sinister and significant rumble of approaching thunder. a confusion of associated ideas possessed my brain, leading me to grope back toward the farthest corner of the cellar. my eyes, however, never turned away from the horrible opening at the base of the chimney; and i began to get glimpses of the crumbling bricks and unhealthy weeds as faint glows of lightning penetrated the weeds outside and illumined the chinks in the upper wall. every second i was consumed with a mixture of fear and curiosity. what would the storm call forthor was there anything left for it to call? guided by a lightning flash i settled myself down behind a dense clump of vegetation, through which i could see the opening without being seen. if heaven is merciful, it will some day efface from my consciousness the sight that i saw, and let me live my last years in peace. i cannot sleep at night now, and have to take opiates when it thunders. the thing came abruptly and unannounced; a demon, ratlike scurrying from pits remote and unimaginable, a hellish panting and stifled grunting, and then from that opening beneath the chimney a burst of multitudinous and leprous life a loathsome nightspawned flood of organic corruption more devastatingly hideous than the blackest conjurations of mortal madness and morbidity. seething, stewing, surging, bubbling like serpents slime it rolled up and out of that yawning hole, spreading like a septic contagion and streaming from the cellar at every point of egress streaming out to scatter through the accursed midnight forests and strew fear, madness, and death. shrieking, slithering, torrential shadows of red viscous madness chasing one another through endless, ensanguined condors of purple fulgurous sky... formless phantasms and kaleidoscopic mutations of a ghoulish, remembered scene; forests of monstrous overnourished oaks with serpent roots twisting and sucking unnamable juices from an earth verminous with millions of cannibal devils; moundlike tentacles groping from underground nuclei of polypous perversion... insane lightning over malignant ivied walls and demon arcades choked with fungous vegetation... heaven be thanked for the instinct which led me unconscious to places where men dwell; to the peaceful village that slept under the calm stars of clearing skies. i had recovered enough in a week to send to albany for a gang of men to blow up the martense mansion and the entire top of tempest mountain with dynamite, stop up all the discoverable moundburrows, and destroy certain overnourished trees whose very existence seemed an insult to sanity. i could sleep a little after they had done this, but true rest will never come as long as i remember that nameless secret of the lurking fear. the thing will haunt me, for who can say the extermination is complete, and that analogous phenomena do not exist all over the world? who can, with my knowledge, think of the earths unknown caverns without a nightmare dread of future possibilities? i cannot see a well or a subway entrance without shuddering... why cannot the doctors give me something to make me sleep, or truly calm my brain when it thunders? what i saw in the glow of flashlight after i shot the unspeakable straggling object was so simple that almost a minute elapsed before i understood and went delirious. the object was nauseous; a filthy whitish gorilla thing with sharp yellow fangs and matted fur. it was the ultimate product of mammalian degeneration; the frightful outcome of isolated spawning, multiplication, and cannibal nutrition above and below the ground; the embodiment of all the snarling and chaos and grinning fear that lurk behind life. it had looked at me as it died, and its eyes had the same odd quality that marked those other eyes which had stared at me underground and excited cloudy recollections. one eye was blue, the other brown. they were the dissimilar martense eyes of the old legends, and i knew in one inundating cataclysm of voiceless horror what had become of that vanished family; the terrible and thundercrazed house of martense. i am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my advice without knowing why. it is altogether against my will that i tell my reasons for opposing this contemplated invasion of the antarctic with its vast fossil hunt and its wholesale boring and melting of the ancient ice caps. and i am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain. doubt of the real facts, as i must reveal them, is inevitable; yet, if i suppressed what will seem extravagant and incredible, there would be nothing left. the hitherto withheld photographs, both ordinary and aerial, will count in my favor, for they are damnably vivid and graphic. still, they will be doubted because of the great lengths to which clever fakery can be carried. the ink drawings, of course, will be jeered at as obvious impostures, notwithstanding a strangeness of technique which art experts ought to remark and puzzle over. in the end i must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific leaders who have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh my data on its own hideously convincing merits or in the light of certain primordial and highly baffling myth cycles; and on the other hand, sufficient influence to deter the exploring world in general from any rash and overambitious program in the region of those mountains of madness. it is an unfortunate fact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates, connected only with a small university, have little chance of making an impression where matters of a wildly bizarre or highly controversial nature are concerned. it is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists in the fields which came primarily to be concerned. as a geologist, my object in leading the miskatonic university expedition was wholly that of securing deeplevel specimens of rock and soil from various parts of the antarctic continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by professor frank h. pabodie of our engineering department. i had no wish to be a pioneer in any other field than this, but i did hope that the use of this new mechanical appliance at different points along previously explored paths would bring to light materials of a sort hitherto unreached by the ordinary methods of collection. pabodies drilling apparatus, as the public already knows from our reports, was unique and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine the ordinary artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular rock drill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardness. steel head, jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derrick, dynamiting paraphernalia, cording, rubbishremoval auger, and sectional piping for bores five inches wide and up to one thousand feet deep all formed, with needed accessories, no greater load than three sevendog sledges could carry. this was made possible by the clever aluminum alloy of which most of the metal objects were fashioned. four large dornier aeroplanes, designed especially for the tremendous altitude flying necessary on the antarctic plateau and with added fuelwarming and quickstarting devices worked out by pabodie, could transport our entire expedition from a base at the edge of the great ice barrier to various suitable inland points, and from these points a sufficient quota of dogs would serve us. we planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season or longer, if absolutely necessary would permit, operating mostly in the mountain ranges and on the plateau south of ross sea; regions explored in varying degree by shackleton, amundsen, scott, and byrd. with frequent changes of camp, made by aeroplane and involving distances great enough to be of geological significance, we expected to unearth a quite unprecedented amount of material especially in the precambrian strata of which so narrow a range of antarctic specimens had previously been secured. we wished also to obtain as great as possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal life history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the highest importance to our knowledge of the earths past. that the antarctic continent was once temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetable and animal life of which the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and penguins of the northern edge are the only survivals, is a matter of common information; and we hoped to expand that information in variety, accuracy, and detail. when a simple boring revealed fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the aperture by blasting, in order to get specimens of suitable size and condition. our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the upper soil or rock, were to be confined to exposed, or nearly exposed, land surfaces these inevitably being slopes and ridges because of the mile or twomile thickness of solid ice overlying the lower levels. we could not afford to waste drilling the depth of any considerable amount of mere glaciation, though pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clusters of borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a gasolinedriven dynamo. it is this plan which we could not put into effect except experimentally on an expedition such as ours that the coming starkweathermoore expedition proposes to follow, despite the warnings i have issued since our return from the antarctic. the public knows of the miskatonic expedition through our frequent wireless reports to the arkham advertiser and associated press, and through the later articles of pabodie and myself. we consisted of four men from the university pabodie, lake of the biology department, atwood of the physics department also a meteorologist and myself, representing geology and having nominal command besides sixteen assistants: seven graduate students from miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics. of these sixteen, twelve were qualified aeroplane pilots, all but two of whom were competent wireless operators. eight of them understood navigation with compass and sextant, as did pabodie, atwood, and i. in addition, of course, our two ships wooden exwhalers, reinforced for ice conditions and having auxiliary steam were fully manned. the nathaniel derby pickman foundation, aided by a few special contributions, financed the expedition; hence our preparations were extremely thorough, despite the absence of great publicity. the dogs, sledges, machines, camp materials, and unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered in boston, and there our ships were loaded. we were marvelously wellequipped for our specific purposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen, transportation, and camp construction we profited by the excellent example of our many recent and exceptionally brilliant predecessors. it was the unusual number and fame of these predecessors which made our own expedition ample though it was so little noticed by the world at large. the last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancystirring. great barren peaks of mystery loomed up constantly against the west as the low northern sun of noon or the still lower horizongrazing southern sun of midnight poured its hazy reddish rays over the white snow, bluish ice and water lanes, and black bits of exposed granite slope. through the desolate summits swept ranging, intermittent gusts of the terrible antarctic wind; whose cadences sometimes held vague suggestions of a wild and halfsentient musical piping, with notes extending over a wide range, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me disquieting and even dimly terrible. something about the scene reminded me of the strange and disturbing asian paintings of nicholas roerich, and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the evilly fabled plateau of leng which occur in the dreaded necronomicon of the mad arab abdul alhazred. i was rather sorry, later on, that i had ever looked into that monstrous book at the college library. the lavas that restlessly roll their sulphurous currents down yaanek in the ultimate climes of the pole that groan as they roll down mount yaanek in the realms of the boreal pole. danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of poe. i was interested myself because of the antarctic scene of poes only long story the disturbing and enigmatical arthur gordon pym. on the barren shore, and on the lofty ice barrier in the background, myriads of grotesque penguins squawked and flapped their fins, while many fat seals were visible on the water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice. only four of our planes were needed to carry the actual exploring material, the fifth being left with a pilot and two men from the ships at the storage cache to form a means of reaching us from the arkham in case all our exploring planes were lost. later, when not using all the other planes for moving apparatus, we would employ one or two in a shuttle transportation service between this cache and another permanent base on the great plateau from six hundred to seven hundred miles southward, beyond beardmore glacier. despite the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour down from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate bases, taking our chances in the interest of economy and probable efficiency. in certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiseled after boring revealed their nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments; notably ferns, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such mollusks as linguellae and gastropods all of which seemed of real significance in connection with the regions primordial history. there was also a queer triangular, striated marking, about a foot in greatest diameter, which lake pieced together from three fragments of slate brought up from a deepblasted aperture. these fragments came from a point to the westward, near the queen alexandra range; and lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their curious marking unusually puzzling and provocative, though to my geological eye it looked not unlike some of the ripple effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks. since slate is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum is pressed, and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any markings which may exist, i saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated depression. at length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying five hundred miles eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh subbase at a point which would probably be on the smaller continental division, as we mistakenly conceived it. geological specimens obtained there would be desirable for purposes of comparison. our health so far had remained excellent lime juice well offsetting the steady diet of tinned and salted food, and temperatures generally above zero enabling us to do without our thickest furs. it was now midsummer, and with haste and care we might be able to conclude work by march and avoid a tedious wintering through the long antarctic night. several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west, but we had escaped damage through the skill of atwood in devising rudimentary aeroplane shelters and windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and reinforcing the principal camp buildings with snow. our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost uncanny. the outside world knew, of course, of our program, and was told also of lakes strange and dogged insistence on a westward or rather, northwestward prospecting trip before our radical shift to the new base. it seems that he had pondered a great deal, and with alarmingly radical daring, over that triangular striated marking in the slate; reading into it certain contradictions in nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to the utmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the weststretching formation to which the exhumed fragments evidently belonged. he was strangely convinced that the marking was the print of some bulky, unknown, and radically unclassifiable organism of considerably advanced evolution, notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a date cambrian if not actually precambrian as to preclude the probable existence not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all above the unicellular or at most the trilobite stage. these fragments, with their odd marking, must have been five hundred million to a thousand million years old. ii three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in the teeth of a raw and piercing gale; and when i dispatched a message of protest against further hazards, lake replied curtly that his new specimens made any hazard worth taking. i saw that his excitement had reached the point of mutiny, and that i could do nothing to check this headlong risk of the whole expeditions success; but it was appalling to think of his plunging deeper and deeper into that treacherous and sinister white immensity of tempests and unfathomed mysteries which stretched off for some fifteen hundred miles to the halfknown, halfsuspected coast line of queen mary and knox lands. then, in about an hour and a half more, came that doubly excited message from lakes moving plane, which almost reversed my sentiments and made me wish i had accompanied the party: after that pabodie, the men and i hung breathlessly over the receiver. thought of this titanic mountain rampart seven hundred miles away inflamed our deepest sense of adventure; and we rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves personally, had been its discoverers. in half an hour lake called us again: moultons plane forced down on plateau in foothills, but nobody hurt and perhaps can repair. shall transfer essentials to other three for return or further moves if necessary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just now. mountains surpass anything in imagination. am going up scouting in carrolls plane, with all weight out. you cant imagine anything like this. highest peaks must go over thirtyfive thousand feet. everest out of the running. atwood to work out height with theodolite while carroll and i go up. probably wrong about cones, for formations look stratified. possibly precambrian slate with other strata mixed in. queer skyline effects regular sections of cubes clinging to highest peaks. whole thing marvelous in redgold light of low sun. like land of mystery in a dream or gateway to forbidden world of untrodden wonder. wish you were here to study. up with carroll over highest foothills. dont dare try really tall peaks in present weather, but shall later. frightful work climbing, and hard going at this altitude, but worth it. great range fairly solid, hence cant get any glimpses beyond. main summits exceed himalayas, and very queer. range looks like precambrian slate, with plain signs of many other upheaved strata. was wrong about volcanism. goes farther in either direction than we can see. swept clear of snow above about twentyone thousand feet. odd formations on slopes of highest mountains. great low square blocks with exactly vertical sides, and rectangular lines of low, vertical ramparts, like the old asian castles clinging to steep mountains in roerichs paintings. impressive from distance. flew close to some, and carroll thought they were formed of smaller separate pieces, but that is probably weathering. most edges crumbled and rounded off as if exposed to storms and climate changes for millions of years. parts, especially upper parts, seem to be of lightercolored rock than any visible strata on slopes proper, hence of evidently crystalline origin. close flying shows many cave mouths, some unusually regular in outline, square or semicircular. you must come and investigate. think i saw rampart squarely on top of one peak. height seems about thirty thousand to thirtyfive thousand feet. am up twentyone thousand, five hundred myself, in devilish, gnawing cold. wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of caves, but no flying danger so far. from then on for another half hour lake kept up a running fire of comment, and expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot. i replied that i would join him as soon as he could send a plane, and that pabodie and i would work out the best gasoline plan just where and how to concentrate our supply in view of the expeditions altered character. obviously, lakes boring operations, as well as his aeroplane activities, would require a great deal for the new base which he planned to establish at the foot of the mountains; and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made, after all, this season. in connection with this business i called captain douglas and asked him to get as much as possible out of the ships and up the barrier with the single dog team we had left there. a direct route across the unknown region between lake and mcmurdo sound was what we really ought to establish. lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay where moultons plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed somewhat. the ice sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visible, and he would sink some borings and blasts at that very point before making any sledge trips or climbing expeditions. he spoke of the ineffable majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his sensations at being in the lee of vast, silent pinnacles whose ranks shot up like a wall reaching the sky at the worlds rim. atwoods theodolite observations had placed the height of the five tallest peaks at from thirty thousand to thirtyfour thousand feet. the windswept nature of the terrain clearly disturbed lake, for it argued the occasional existence of prodigious gales, violent beyond anything we had so far encountered. his camp lay a little more than five miles from where the higher foothills rose abruptly. i could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his wordsflashed across a glacial void of seven hundred miles as he urged that we all hasten with the matter and get the strange, new region disposed of as soon as possible. he was about to rest now, after a continuous days work of almost unparalleled speed, strenuousness, and results. in the morning i had a threecornered wireless talk with lake and captain douglas at their widely separated bases. it was agreed that one of lakes planes would come to my base for pabodie, the five men, and myself, as well as for all the fuel it could carry. the rest of the fuel question, depending on our decision about an easterly trip, could wait for a few days, since lake had enough for immediate camp heat and borings. eventually the old southern base ought to be restocked, but if we postponed the easterly trip we would not use it till the next summer, and, meanwhile, lake must send a plane to explore a direct route between his new mountains and mcmurdo sound. pabodie and i prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as the case might be. if we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight from lakes base to the arkham without returning to this spot. some of our conical tents had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we decided to complete the job of making a permanent village. owing to a very liberal tent supply, lake had with him all that his base would need, even after our arrival. i wirelessed that pabodie and i would be ready for the northwestward move after one days work and one nights rest. he had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the expeditions general program; hence he set up the drill and put five men to work with it while the rest finished settling the camp and repairing the damaged aeroplane. the softest visible rock a sandstone about a quarter of a mile from the camp had been chosen for the first sampling; and the drill made excellent progress without much supplementary blasting. it was about three hours afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the operation, that the shouting of the drill crew was heard; and that young gedney the acting foreman rushed into the camp with the startling news. they had struck a cave. early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a vein of comanchian limestone, full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini, and spirifera, and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges and marine vertebrate bones the latter probably of teleosts, sharks, and ganoids. this, in itself, was important enough, as affording the first vertebrate fossils the expedition had yet secured; but when shortly afterward the drill head dropped through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new and doubly intense wave of excitement spread among the excavators. a goodsized blast had laid open the subterrene secret; and now, through a jagged aperture perhaps five feet across and three feet thick, there yawned before the avid searchers a section of shallow limestone hollowing worn more than fifty million years ago by the trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world. the hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep but extended off indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which suggested its membership in an extensive subterranean system. its roof and floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites, some of which met in columnar form: but important above all else was the vast deposit of shells and bones, which in places nearly choked the passage. washed down from unknown jungles of mesozoic tree ferns and fungi, and forests of tertiary cycads, fan palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained representatives of more cretaceous, eocene, and other animal species than the greatest paleontologist could have counted or classified in a year. mollusks, crustacean armor, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early mammals great and small, known and unknown. no wonder gedney ran back to the camp shouting, and no wonder everyone else dropped work and rushed headlong through the biting cold to where the tall derrick marked a newfound gateway to secrets of inner earth and vanished aeons. when lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity, he scribbled a message in his notebook and had young moulton run back to the camp to dispatch it by wireless. this was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the identification of early shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of labyrinthodonts and thecodonts, great mosasaur skull fragments, dinosaur vertebrae and armor plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing bones, archaeopteryx debris, miocene sharks teeth, primitive bird skulls, and other bones of archaic mammals such as palaeotheres, xiphodons, eohippi, oreodons, and titanotheres. there was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, deer, or bovine animal; hence lake concluded that the last deposits had occurred during the oligocene age, and that the hollowed stratum had lain in its present dried, dead, and inaccessible state for at least thirty million years. on the other hand, the prevalence of very early life forms was singular in the highest degree. though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such typical imbedded fossils as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably comanchian and not a particle earlier, the free fragments in the hollow space included a surprising proportion from organisms hitherto considered as peculiar to far older periods even rudimentary fishes, mollusks, and corals as remote as the silunan or ordovician. the inevitable inference was that in this part of the world there had been a remarkable and unique degree of continuity between the life of over three hundred million years ago and that of only thirty million years ago. how far this continuity had extended beyond the oligocene age when the cavern was closed was of course past all speculation. in any event, the coming of the frightful ice in the pleistocene some five hundred thousand years ago a mere yesterday as compared with the age of this cavity must have put an end to any of the primal forms which had locally managed to outlive their common terms. lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin written and dispatched across the snow to the camp before moulton could get back. after that moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes, transmitting to me and to the arkham for relaying to the outside world the frequent postscripts which lake sent him by a succession of messengers. those who followed the newspapers will remember the excitement created among men of science by that afternoons reports reports which have finally led, after all these years, to the organization of that very starkweathermoore expedition which i am so anxious to dissuade from its purposes. i had better give the messages literally as lake sent them, and as our base operator mctighe translated them from the pencil shorthand: fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestone fragments from blasts. several distinct triangular striated prints like those in archaean slate, proving that source survived from over six hundred million years ago to comanchian times without more than moderate morphological changes and decrease in average size. comanchian prints apparently more primitive or decadent, if anything, than older ones. emphasize importance of discovery in press. will mean to biology what einstein has meant to mathematics and physics. joins up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions. appears to indicate, as i suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or cycles of organic life before known one that begins with archaeozoic cells. was evolved and specialized not later than a thousand million years ago, when planet was young and recently uninhabitable for any life forms or normal protoplasmic structure. question arises when, where, and how development took place. later. examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marine saurians and primitive mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony structure not attributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any period, of two sorts straight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking incisions. one or two cases of cleanly severed bones. not many specimens affected. am sending to camp for electric torches. will extend search area underground by hacking away stalactites. still later. have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inches across and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation greenish, but no evidences to place its period. has curious smoothness and regularity. shaped like fivepointed star with tips broken off, and signs of other cleavage at inward angles and in center of surface. small, smooth depression in center of unbroken surface. arouses much curiosity as to source and weathering. probably some freak of water action. carroll, with magnifier, thinks he can make out additional markings of geologic significance. groups of tiny dots in regular patterns. dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate this soapstone. must see if it has any peculiar odor. will report again when mills gets back with light and we start on underground area. their wings seem to be membranous, stretched on frame work of glandular tubing. apparent minute orifices in frame tubing at wing tips. ends of body shriveled, giving no clue to interior or to what has been broken off there. must dissect when we get back to camp. cant decide whether vegetable or animal. many features obviously of almost incredible primitiveness. have set all hands cutting stalactites and looking for further specimens. additional scarred bones found, but these must wait. having trouble with dogs. they cant endure the new specimen, and would probably tear it to pieces if we didnt keep it at a distance from them. of organic specimens, eight apparently perfect, with all appendages. have brought all to surface, leading off dogs to distance. they cannot stand the things. give close attention to description and repeat back for accuracy papers must get this right. objects are eight feet long all over. sixfoot, fiveridged barrel torso three and fivetenths feet central diameter, one foot end diameters. dark gray, flexible, and infinitely tough. sevenfoot membranous wings of same color, found folded, spread out of furrows between ridges. wing framework tubular or glandular, of lighter gray, with orifices at wing tips. spread wings have serrated edge. around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, stavelike ridges are five systems of light gray flexible arms or tentacles found tightly folded to torso but expansible to maximum length of over three feet. like arms of primitive crinoid. single stalks three inches diameter branch after six inches into five substalks, each of which branches after eight inches into small, tapering tentacles or tendrils, giving each stalk a total of twentyfive tentacles. at top of torso blunt, bulbous neck of lighter gray, with gilllike suggestions, holds yellowish fivepointed starfishshaped apparent head covered with threeinch wiry cilia of various prismatic colors. head thick and puffy, about two feet point to point, with threeinch flexible yellowish tubes projecting from each point. slit in exact center of top probably breathing aperture. at end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membrane rolls back on handling to reveal glassy, redirised globe, evidently an eye. five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of starfishshaped head and end in saclike swellings of same color which, upon pressure, open to bellshaped orifices two inches maximum diameter and lined with sharp, white tooth like projections probably mouths. all these tubes, cilia, and points of starfish head, found folded tightly down; tubes and points clinging to bulbous neck and torso. flexibility surprising despite vast toughness. at bottom of torso, rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head arrangements exist. bulbous lightgray pseudoneck, without gill suggestions, holds greenish fivepointed starfish arrangement. tough, muscular arms four feet long and tapering from seven inches diameter at base to about two and fivetenths at point. to each point is attached small end of a greenish fiveveined membranous triangle eight inches long and six wide at farther end. this is the paddle, fin, or pseudofoot which has made prints in rocks from a thousand million to fifty or sixty million years old. from inner angles of starfish arrangement project twofoot reddish tubes tapering from three inches diameter at base to one at tip. orifices at tips. all these parts infinitely tough and leathery, but extremely flexible. fourfoot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of some sort, marine or otherwise. when moved, display suggestions of exaggerated muscularity. as found, all these projections tightly folded over pseudoneck and end of torso, corresponding to projections at other end. cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now favor animal. probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata without loss of certain primitive features. echinoderm resemblances unmistakable despite local contradictory evidences. wing structure puzzles in view of probable marine habitat, but may have use in water navigation. symmetry is curiously vegetablelike, suggesting vegetable s essential upanddown structure rather than animals foreandaft structure. fabulously early date of evolution, preceding even simplest archaean protozoa hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin. complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of primal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes inevitable. dyer and pabodie have read necronomicon and seen clark ashton smiths nightmare paintings based on text, and will understand when i speak of elder things supposed to have created all earth life as jest or mistake. students have always thought conception formed from morbid imaginative treatment of very ancient tropical radiata. also like prehistoric folklore things wilmarth has spoken of cthulhu cult appendages, etc. vast field of study opened. deposits probably of late cretaceous or early eocene period, judging from associated specimens. massive stalagmites deposited above them. hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented damage. state of preservation miraculous, evidently owing to limestone action. no more found so far, but will resume search later. job now to get fourteen huge specimens to camp without dogs, which bark furiously and cant be trusted near them. with nine men three left to guard the dogs we ought to manage the three sledges fairly well, though wind is bad. must establish plane communication with mcmurdo sound and begin shipping material. but ive got to dissect one of these things before we take any rest. wish i had a real laboratory here. dyer better kick himself for having tried to stop my westward trip. first the worlds greatest mountains, and then this. if this last isnt the high spot of the expedition, i dont know what is. were made scientifically. congrats, pabodie, on the drill that opened up the cave. now will arkham please repeat description? the sensations of pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almost beyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in enthusiasm. mctighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they came from the droning receiving set, wrote out the entire message from his shorthand version as soon as lakes operator signed off. all appreciated the epochmaking significance of the discovery, and i sent lake congratulations as soon as the arkhams operator had repeated back the descriptive parts as requested; and my example was followed by sherman from his station at the mcmurdo sound supply cache, as well as by captain douglas of the arkham. later, as head of the expedition, i added some remarks to be relayed through the arkham to the outside world. of course, rest was an absurd thought amidst this excitement; and my only wish was to get to lakes camp as quickly as i could. it disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early aerial travel impossible. but within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish disappointment. lake, sending more messages, told of the completely successful transportation of the fourteen great specimens to the camp. it had been a hard pull, for the things were surprisingly heavy; but nine men had accomplished it very neatly. now some of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a safe distance from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater convenience in feeding. the specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the camp, save for one on which lake was making crude attempts at dissection. this dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected, for, despite the heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the deceptively flexible tissues of the chosen specimen a powerful and intact one lost nothing of their more than leathery toughness. lake was puzzled as to how he might make the requisite incisions without violence destructive enough to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for. he had, it is true, seven more perfect specimens; but these were too few to use up recklessly unless the cave might later yield an unlimited supply. accordingly he removed the specimen and dragged in one which, though having remnants of the starfish arrangements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly disrupted along one of the great torso furrows. results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocative indeed. nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly able to cut the anomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all awed and bewildered. existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for this thing was no product of any cell growth science knows about. there had been scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty million years, the internal organs were wholly intact. the leathery, undeteriorative, and almost indestructible quality was an inherent attribute of the things form of organization, and pertained to some paleogean cycle of invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers of speculation. at first all that lake found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawing effect, organic moisture of pungent and offensive odor was encountered toward the things uninjured side. it was not blood, but a thick, darkgreen fluid apparently answering the same purpose. by the time lake reached this stage, all thirtyseven dogs had been brought to the still uncompleted corral near the camp, and even at that distance set up a savage barking and show of restlessness at the acrid, diffusive smell. far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection merely deepened its mystery. all guesses about its external members had been correct, and on the evidence of these one could hardly hesitate to call the thing animal; but internal inspection brought up so many vegetable evidences that lake was left hopelessly at sea. it had digestion and circulation, and eliminated waste matter through the reddish tubes of its starfishshaped base. cursorily, one would say that its respiration apparatus handled oxygen rather than carbon dioxide, and there were odd evidences of airstorage chambers and methods of shifting respiration from the external orifice to at least two other fully developed breathing systems gills and pores. clearly, it was amphibian, and probably adapted to long airless hibernation periods as well. vocal organs seemed present in connection with the main respiratory system, but they presented anomalies beyond immediate solution. articulate speech, in the sense of syllable utterance, seemed barely conceivable, but musical piping notes covering a wide range were highly probable. the muscular system was almost prematurely developed. the nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave lake aghast. though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing had a set of ganglial centers and connectives arguing the very extremes of specialized development. its fivelobed brain was surprisingly advanced, and there were signs of a sensory equipment, served in part through the wiry cilia of the head, involving factors alien to any other terrestrial organism. probably it has more than five senses, so that its habits could not be predicted from any existing analogy. it must, lake thought, have been a creature of keen sensitiveness and delicately differentiated functions in its primal world much like the ants and bees of today. it reproduced like the vegetable cryptogams, especially the pteridophyta, having spore cases at the tips of the wings and evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus. but to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. it looked like a radiate, but was clearly something more. it was partly vegetable, but had threefourths of the essentials of animal structure. that it was marine in origin, its symmetrical contour and certain other attributes clearly indicated; yet one could not be exact as to the limit of its later adaptations. the wings, after all, held a persistent suggestion of the aerial. how it could have undergone its tremendously complex evolution on a newborn earth in time to leave prints in archaean rocks was so far beyond conception as to make lake whimsically recall the primal myths about great old ones who filtered down from the stars and concocted earth life as a joke or mistake; and the wild tales of cosmic hill things from outside told by a folklorist colleague in miskatonics english department. naturally, he considered the possibility of the precambrian prints having been made by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens, but quickly rejected this toofacile theory upon considering the advanced structural qualities of the older fossils. if anything, the later contours showed decadence rather than higher evolution. the size of the pseudofeet had decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened and simplified. moreover, the nerves and organs just examined held singular suggestions of retrogression from forms still more complex. atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly prevalent. altogether, little could be said to have been solved; and lake fell back on mythology for a provisional name jocosely dubbing his finds the elder ones. it was after four when lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us all to share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a little higher. he held some friendly chat with pabodie over the ether, and repeated his praise of the really marvelous drills that had helped him make his discovery. atwood also sent greetings and praises. i gave lake a warm word of congratulations, owning up that he was right about the western trip, and we all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the morning. if the gale was then over, lake would send a plane for the party at my base. just before retiring i dispatched a final message to the arkham with instructions about toning down the days news for the outside world, since the full details seemed radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further substantiated. iii none of us, i imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning. both the excitement of lakes discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were against such a thing. so savage was the blast, even where we were, that we could not help wondering how much worse it was at lakes camp, directly under the vast unknown peaks that bred and delivered it. mctighe was awake at ten oclock and tried to get lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electrical condition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent communication. we did, however, get the arkham, and douglas told me that he had likewise been vainly trying to reach lake. he had not known about the wind, for very little was blowing at mcmurdo sound, despite its persistent rage where we were. by six oclock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wireless consultation with douglas and thorfinnssen i resolved to take steps toward investigation. the fifth aeroplane, which we had left at the mcmurdo sound supply cache with sherman and two sailors, was in good shape and ready for instant use, and it seemed that the very emergency for which it had been saved was now upon us. i got sherman by wireless and ordered him to join me with the plane and the two sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible, the air conditions being apparently highly favorable. we then talked over the personnel of the coming investigation party, and decided that we would include all hands, together with the sledge and dogs which i had kept with me. even so great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our special orders for heavy machinery transportation. at intervals i still tried to reach lake with the wireless, but all to no purpose. every incident of that fourandahalfhour flight is burned into my recollection because of its crucial position in my life. it marked my loss, at the age of fiftyfour, of all that peace and balance which the normal mind possesses through its accustomed conception of external nature and natures laws. thenceforward the ten of us but the student danforth and myself above all others were to face a hideously amplified world of lurking horrors which nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing with mankind in general if we could. the newspapers have printed the bulletins we sent from the moving plane, telling of our nonstop course, our two battles with treacherous upperair gales, our glimpse of the broken surface where lake had sunk his midjourney shaft three days before, and our sight of a group of those strange fluffy snow cylinders noted by amundsen and byrd as rolling in the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau. there came a point, though, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words the press would understand, and a latter point when we had to adopt an actual rule of strict censorship. the sailor larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witchlike cones and pinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent everyone to the windows of the great cabined plane. despite our speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence; hence we knew that they must be infinitely far off, and visible only because of their abnormal height. little by little, however, they rose grimly into the western sky; allowing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits, and to catch the curious sense of fantasy which they inspired as seen in the reddish antarctic light against the provocative background of iridescent icedust clouds. in the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pervasive hint of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation. it was as if these stark, nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway into forbidden spheres of dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and ultradimensionality. i could not help feeling that they were evil things mountains of madness whose farther slopes looked out over some accursed ultimate abyss. that seething, halfluminous cloud background held ineffable suggestions of a vague, ethereal beyondness far more than terrestrially spatial, and gave appalling reminders of the utter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and aeonlong death of this untrodden and unfathomed austral world. it was young danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of the higher mountain skyline regularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes, which lake had mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his comparison with the dreamlike suggestions of primordial temple ruins, on cloudy asian mountaintops so subtly and strangely painted by roerich. there was indeed something hauntingly roerichlike about this whole unearthly continent of mountainous mystery. i had felt it in october when we first caught sight of victoria land, and i felt it afresh now. i felt, too, another wave of uneasy consciousness of archaean mythical resemblances; of how disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famed plateau of leng in the primal writings. mythologists have placed leng in central asia; but the racial memory of man or of his predecessors is long, and it may well be that certain tales have come down from lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than asia and earlier than any human world we know. a few daring mystics have hinted at a prepleistocene origin for the fragmentary pnakotic manuscripts, and have suggested that the devotees of tsathoggua were as alien to mankind as tsathoggua itself. leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not a region i would care to be in or near, nor did i relish the proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and archaean monstrosities as those lake had just mentioned. at the moment i felt sorry that i had ever read the abhorred necronomicon, or talked so much with that unpleasantly erudite folklorist wilmarth at the university. this mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre mirage which burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near the mountains and began to make out the cumulative undulations of the foothills. i had seen dozens of polar mirages during the preceding weeks, some of them quite as uncanny and fantastically vivid as the present example; but this one had a wholly novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and i shuddered as the seething labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the troubled ice vapors above our heads. i was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the various nightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted, temporary forms of even vaster hideousness. as the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence we began to look earthward again, and saw that our journeys end was not far off. the unknown mountains ahead rose dizzily up like a fearsome rampart of giants, their curious regularities showing with startling clearness even without a field glass. we were over the lowest foothills now, and could see amidst the snow, ice, and bare patches of their main plateau a couple of darkish spots which we took to be lakes camp and boring. the higher foothills shot up between five and six miles away, forming a range almost distinct from the terrifying line of more than himalayan peaks beyond them. at length ropes the student who had relieved mctighe at the controls began to head downward toward the lefthand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. as he did so, mctighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to receive from our expedition. everyone, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the rest of our antarctic sojourn. some hours after our landing we sent a guarded report of the tragedy we found, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole lake party by the frightful wind of the preceding day, or of the night before that. eleven known dead, young gedney missing. people pardoned our hazy lack of details through realization of the shock the sad event must have caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling action of the wind had rendered all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation outside. indeed, i flatter myself that even in the midst of our distress, utter bewilderment, and soulclutching horror, we scarcely went beyond the truth in any specific instance. the tremendous significance lies in what we dared not tell; what i would not tell now but for the need of warning others off from nameless terrors. it is a fact that the wind had brought dreadful havoc. whether all could have lived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt. the storm, with its fury of madly driven ice particles, must have been beyond anything our expedition had encountered before. one aeroplane shelterwall, it seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and inadequate state was nearly pulverized and the derrick at the distant boring was entirely shaken to pieces. the exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was bruised into a high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite their snow banking. wooden surfaces left out in the blaster were pitted and denuded of paint, and all signs of tracks in the snow were completely obliterated. it is also true that we found none of the archaean biological objects in a condition to take outside as a whole. we did gather some minerals from a vast, tumbled pile, including several of the greenish soapstone fragments whose odd fivepointed rounding and faint patterns of grouped dots caused so many doubtful comparisons; and some fossil bones, among which were the most typical of the curiously injured specimens. none of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow inclosure near the camp being almost wholly destroyed. the wind may have done that, though the greater breakage on the side next the camp, which was not the windward one, suggests an outward leap or break of the frantic beasts themselves. all three sledges were gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may have blown them off into the unknown. the drill and icemelting machinery at the boring were too badly damaged to warrant salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly disturbing gateway to the past which lake had blasted. we likewise left at the camp the two most shaken up of the planes; since our surviving party had only four real pilots sherman, danforth, mctighe, and ropes in all, with danforth in a poor nervous shape to navigate. we brought back all the books, scientific equipment, and other incidentals we could find, though much was rather unaccountably blown away. spare tents and furs were either missing or badly out of condition. about the fourteen biological specimens, we were pardonably indefinite. we said that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left of them to prove lakes description wholly and impressively accurate. it was hard work keeping our personal emotions out of this matter and we did not mention numbers or say exactly how we had found those which we did find. we had by that time agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness on the part of lakes men, and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrosities carefully buried upright in ninefoot snow graves under fivepointed mounds punched over with groups of dots in patterns exactly those on the queer greenish soapstones dug up from mesozoic or tertiary times. the eight perfect specimens mentioned by lake seemed to have been completely blown away. we were careful, too, about the publics general peace of mind; hence danforth and i said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next day. it was the fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly cross a range of such height, which mercifully limited that scouting tour to the two of us. on our return at one a.m., danforth was close to hysterics, but kept an admirably stiff upper lip. it took no persuasion to make him promise not to show our sketches and the other things we brought away in our pockets, not to say anything more to the others than what we had agreed to relay outside, and to hide our camera films for private development later on; so that part of my present story will be as new to pabodie, mctighe, ropes, sherman, and the rest as it will be to the world in general. indeed, danforth is closer mouthed than i: for he saw, or thinks he saw, one thing he will not tell even me. as all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent a confirmation of lakes opinion that the great peaks are of archaean slate and other very primal crumpled strata unchanged since at least middle comanchian times; a conventional comment on the regularity of the clinging cube and rampart formations; a decision that the cave mouths indicate dissolved calcaerous veins; a conjecture that certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling and crossing of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers; and a remark that the mysterious other side holds a lofty and immense superplateau as ancient and unchanging as the mountains themselves twenty thousand feet in elevation, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial layer and with low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and the sheer precipices of the highest peaks. this body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it completely satisfied the men at the camp. we laid our absence of sixteen hours a longer time than our announced flying, landing, reconnoitering, and rockcollecting program called for to a long mythical spell of adverse wind conditions, and told truly of our landing on the farther foothills. fortunately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any of the others into emulating our flight. had any tried to do that, i would have used every ounce of my persuasion to stop them and i do not know what danforth would have done. while we were gone, pabodie, sherman, ropes, mctighe, and williamson had worked like beavers over lakes two best planes, fitting them again for use despite the altogether unaccountable juggling of their operative mechanism. we decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our old base as soon as possible. even though indirect, that was the safest way to work toward mcmurdo sound; for a straightline flight across the most utterly unknown stretches of the aeondead continent would involve many additional hazards. further exploration was hardly feasible in view of our tragic decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery. the doubts and horrors around us which we did not reveal made us wish only to escape from this austral world of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we could. since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic exploration, and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with splendid unity and faithfulness. even young danforth, with his nervous breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his doctors indeed, as i have said, there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even me, though i think it would help his psychological state if he would consent to do so. it might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no more than the delusive aftermath of an earlier shock. that is the impression i gather after those rare, irresponsible moments when he whispers disjointed things to me things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as he gets a grip on himself again. it will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and some of our efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. we might have known from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the results we announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same agelong pursuit of the unknown. lakes reports of those biological monstrosities had aroused naturalists and paleontologists to the highest pitch, though we were sensible enough not to show the detached parts we had taken from the actual buried specimens, or our photographs of those specimens as they were found. we also refrained from showing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and greenish soapstones; while danforth and i have closely guarded the pictures we took or drew on the superplateau across the range, and the crumpled things we smoothed, studied in terror, and brought away in our pockets. but now that starkweathermoore party is organizing, and with a thoroughness far beyond anything our outfit attempted. if not dissuaded, they will get to the innermost nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up that which we know may end the world. so i must break through all reticences at last even about that ultimate, nameless thing beyond the mountains of madness. iv it is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that i let my mind go back to lakes camp and what we really found there and to that other thing beyond the mountains of madness. i am constantly tempted to shirk the details, and to let hints stand for actual facts and ineluctable deductions. i hope i have said enough already to let me glide briefly over the rest; the rest, that is, of the horror at the camp. i have told of the windravaged terrain, the damaged shelters, the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasiness of our dogs, the missing sledges and other items, the deaths of men and dogs, the absence of gedney, and the six insanely buried biological specimens, strangely sound in texture for all their structural injuries, from a world forty million years dead. i do not recall whether i mentioned that upon checking up the canine bodies we found one dog missing. we did not think much about that till later indeed, only danforth and i have thought of it at all. the principal things i have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and to certain subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind of rationale to the apparent chaos. at the time, i tried to keep the mens minds off those points; for it was so much simpler so much more normal to lay everything to an outbreak of madness on the part of some of lakes party. from the look of things, that demon mountain wind must have been enough to drive any man mad in the midst of this center of all earthly mystery and desolation. the crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies men and dogs alike. they had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn and mangled in fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways. death, so far as we could judge, had in each case come from strangulation or laceration. the dogs had evidently started the trouble, for the state of their illbuilt corral bore witness to its forcible breakage from within. it had been set some distance from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish archaean organisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain. when left alone in that monstrous wind, behind flimsy walls of insufficient height, they must have stampeded whether from the wind itself, or from some subtle, increasing odor emitted by the nightmare specimens, one could not say. but whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough. perhaps i had better put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last though with a categorical statement of opinion, based on the firsthand observations and most rigid deductions of both danforth and myself, that the then missing gedney was in no way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found. i have said that the bodies were frightfully mangled. now i must add that some were incised and subtracted from in the most curious, coldblooded, and inhuman fashion. it was the same with dogs and men. all the healthier, fatter bodies, quadrupedal or bipedal, had had their most solid masses of tissue cut out and removed, as by a careful butcher; and around them was a strange sprinkling of salt taken from the ravaged provision chests on the planes which conjured up the most horrible associations. the thing had occurred in one of the crude aeroplane shelters from which the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced all tracks which could have supplied any plausible theory. scattered bits of clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision subjects, hinted no clues. it is useless to bring up the half impression of certain faint snow prints in one shielded corner of the ruined inclosure because that impression did not concern human prints at all, but was clearly mixed up with all the talk of fossil prints which poor lake had been giving throughout the preceding weeks. one had to be careful of ones imagination in the lee of those overshadowing mountains of madness. as i have indicated, gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the end. when we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men; but the fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered after investigating the monstrous graves, had something to reveal. it was not as lake had left it, for the covered parts of the primal monstrosity had been removed from the improvised table. indeed, we had already realized that one of the six imperfect and insanely buried things we had found the one with the trace of a peculiarly hateful odor must represent the collected sections of the entity which lake had tried to analyze. on and around that laboratory table were strewn other things, and it did not take long for us to guess that those things were the carefully though oddly and inexpertly dissected parts of one man and one dog. i shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting mention of the mans identity. lakes anatomical instruments were missing, but there were evidences of their careful cleansing. the gasoline stove was also gone, though around it we found a curious litter of matches. we buried the human parts beside the other ten men; and the canine parts with the other thirtyfive dogs. concerning the bizarre smudges on the laboratory table, and on the jumble of roughly handled illustrated books scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to speculate. this formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally perplexing. the disappearance of gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjured biological specimens, the three sledges, and certain instruments, illustrated technical and scientific books, writing materials, electric torches and batteries, food and fuel, heating apparatus, spare tents, fur suits, and the like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture; as were likewise the spatterfringed ink blots on certain pieces of paper, and the evidences of curious alien fumbling and experimentation around the planes and all other mechanical devices both at the camp and at the boring. the dogs seemed to abhor this oddly disordered machinery. then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the disappearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried open in the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places. the profusion of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor enigma as did the two or three tent cloths and fur suits which we found lying about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due to clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations. the maltreatment of the human and canine bodies, and the crazy burial of the damaged archaean specimens, were all of a piece with this apparent disintegrative madness. in view of just such an eventuality as the present one, we carefully photographed all the main evidences of insane disorder at the camp; and shall use the prints to buttress our pleas against the departure of the proposed starkweathermoore expedition. our first act after finding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph and open the row of insane graves with the fivepointed snow mounds. we could not help noticing the resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their clusters of grouped dots, to poor lakes descriptions of the strange greenish soapstones; and when we came on some of the soapstones themselves in the great mineral pile, we found the likeness very close indeed. the whole general formation, it must be made clear, seemed abominably suggestive of the starfish head of the archaean entities; and we agreed that the suggestion must have worked potently upon the sensitized minds of lakes overwrought party. for madness centering in gedney as the only possible surviving agent was the explanation spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was concerned; though i will not be so naive as to deny that each of us may have harbored wild guesses which sanity forbade him to formulate completely. sherman, pabodie, and mctighe made an exhaustive aeroplane cruise over all the surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the horizon with field glasses in quest of gedney and of the various missing things; but nothing came to light. the party reported that the titan barrier range extended endlessly to right and left alike, without any diminution in height or essential structure. on some of the peaks, though, the regular cube and rampart formations were bolder and plainer, having doubly fantastic similitudes to roerichpainted asian hill ruins. the distribution of cryptical cave mouths on the black snowdenuded summits seemed roughly even as far as the range could be traced. i have already repeated the noncommittal story we told the men at camp and relayed outside after our return sixteen hours later. it is now my terrible duty to amplify this account by filling in the merciful blanks with hints of what we really saw in the hidden transmontane world hints of the revelations which have finally driven danforth to a nervous collapse. i wish he would add a really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone saw even though it was probably a nervous delusion and which was perhaps the last straw that put him where he is; but he is firm against that. all i can do is to repeat his later disjointed whispers about what set him shrieking as the plane soared back through the windtortured mountain pass after that real and tangible shock which i shared. this will form my last word. if the plain signs of surviving elder horrors in what i disclose be not enough to keep others from meddling with the inner antarctic or at least from prying too deeply beneath the surface of that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and inhuman, aeoncursed desolation the responsibility for unnamable and perhaps immeasurable evils will not be mine. danforth and i, studying the notes made by pabodie in his afternoon flight and checking up with a sextant, had calculated that the lowest available pass in the range lay somewhat to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about twentythree thousand or twentyfour thousand feet above sea level. for this point, then, we first headed in the lightened plane as we embarked on our flight of discovery. the camp itself, on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some twelve thousand feet in altitude; hence the actual height increase necessary was not so vast as it might seem. nevertheless we were acutely conscious of the rarefied air and intense cold as we rose; for, on account of visibility conditions, we had to leave the cabin windows open. we were dressed, of course, in our heaviest furs. as we drew near the forbidding peaks, dark and sinister above the line of crevasseriven snow and interstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the curiously regular formations clinging to the slopes; and thought again of the strange asian paintings of nicholas roerich. the ancient and windweathered rock strata fully verified all of lakes bulletins, and proved that these pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a surprisingly early time in earths history perhaps over fifty million years. how much higher they had once been, it was futile to guess; but everything about this strange region pointed to obscure atmospheric influences unfavorable to change, and calculated to retard the usual climatic processes of rock disintegration. but it was the mountainside tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave mouths which fascinated and disturbed us most. i studied them with a field glass and took aerial photographs while danforth drove; and at times i relieved him at the controls though my aviation knowledge was purely an amateurs in order to let him use the binoculars. we could easily see that much of the material of the things was a lightish archaean quartzite, unlike any formation visible over broad areas of the general surface; and that their regularity was extreme and uncanny to an extent which poor lake had scarcely hinted. the curious cave mouths, near which the odd formations seemed most abundant, presented another albeit a lesser puzzle because of their regularity of outline. they were, as lakes bulletin had said, often approximately square or semicircular; as if the natural orifices had been shaped to greater symmetry by some magic hand. their numerousness and wide distribution were remarkable, and suggested that the whole region was honeycombed with tunnels dissolved out of limestone strata. such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within the caverns, but we saw that they were apparently clear of stalactites and stalagmites. outside, those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the apertures seemed invariably smooth and regular; and danforth thought that the slight cracks and pittings of the weathering tended toward unusual patterns. filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discovered at the camp, he hinted that the pittings vaguely resembled those baffling groups of dots sprinkled over the primeval greenish soapstones, so hideously duplicated on the madly conceived snow mounds above those six buried monstrosities. we had risen gradually in flying over the higher foothills and along toward the relatively low pass we had selected. as we advanced we occasionally looked down at the snow and ice of the land route, wondering whether we could have attempted the trip with the simpler equipment of earlier days. somewhat to our surprise we saw that the terrain was far from difficult as such things go; and that despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have been likely to deter the sledges of a scott, a shackleton, or an amundsen. some of the glaciers appeared to lead up to windbared passes with unusual continuity, and upon reaching our chosen pass we found that its case formed no exception. our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepared to round the crest and peer out over an untrodden world can hardly be described on paper; even though we had no cause to think the regions beyond the range essentially different from those already seen and traversed. the touch of evil mystery in these barrier mountains, and in the beckoning sea of opalescent sky glimpsed betwixt their summits, was a highly subtle and attenuated matter not to be explained in literal words. rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and aesthetic association a thing mixed up with exotic poetry and paintings, and with archaic myths lurking in shunned and forbidden volumes. even the winds burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity; and for a second it seemed that the composite sound included a bizarre musical whistling or piping over a wide range as the blast swept in and out of the omnipresent and resonant cave mouths. there was a cloudy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as complex and unplaceable as any of the other dark impressions. we were now, after a slow ascent, at a height of twentythree thousand, five hundred and seventy feet according to the aneroid; and had left the region of clinging snow definitely below us. up here were only dark, bare rock slopes and the start of roughribbed glaciers but with those provocative cubes, ramparts, and echoing cave mouths to add a portent of the unnatural, the fantastic, and the dreamlike. looking along the line of high peaks, i thought i could see the one mentioned by poor lake, with a rampart exactly on top. it seemed to be half lost in a queer antarctic haze such a haze, perhaps, as had been responsible for lakes early notion of volcanism. the pass loomed directly before us, smooth and windswept between its jagged and malignly frowning pylons. beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling vapors and lighted by the low polar sun the sky of that mysterious farther realm upon which we felt no human eye had ever gazed. a few more feet of altitude and we would behold that realm. danforth and i, unable to speak except in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind that raced through the pass and added to the noise of the unmuffled engines, exchanged eloquent glances. and then, having gained those last few feet, we did indeed stare across the momentous divide and over the unsampled secrets of an elder and utterly alien earth. v i think that both of us simultaneously cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror, and disbelief in our own senses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay beyond. of course, we must have had some natural theory in the back of our heads to steady our faculties for the moment. probably we thought of such things as the grotesquely weathered stones of the garden of the gods in colorado, or the fantastically symmetrical windcarved rocks of the arizona desert. perhaps we even half thought the sight a mirage like that we had seen the morning before on first approaching those mountains of madness. we must have had some such normal notions to fall back upon as our eyes swept that limitless, tempestscarred plateau and grasped the almost endless labyrinth of colossal, regular, and geometrically eurythmic stone masses which reared their crumbled and pitted crests above a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet deep at its thickest, and in places obviously thinner. the effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable, for some fiendish violation of known natural law seemed certain at the outset. here, on a hellishly ancient tableland fully twenty thousand feet high, and in a climate deadly to habitation since a prehuman age not less than five hundred thousand years ago, there stretched nearly to the visions limit a tangle of orderly stone which only the desperation of mental selfdefense could possibly attribute to any but conscious and artificial cause. we had previously dismissed, so far as serious thought was concerned, any theory that the cubes and ramparts of the mountainsides were other than natural in origin. how could they be otherwise, when man himself could scarcely have been differentiated from the great apes at the time when this region succumbed to the present unbroken reign of glacial death? yet now the sway of reason seemed irrefutably shaken, for this cyclopean maze of squared, curved, and angled blocks had features which cut off all comfortable refuge. it was, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in stark, objective, and ineluctable reality. that damnable portent had had a material basis after all there had been some horizontal stratum of ice dust in the upper air, and this shocking stone survival had projected its image across the mountains according to the simple laws of reflection, of course, the phantom had been twisted and exaggerated, and had contained things which the real source did not contain; yet now, as we saw that real source, we thought it even more hideous and menacing than its distant image. only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast stone towers and ramparts had saved the frightful things from utter annihilation in the hundreds of thousands perhaps millions of years it had brooded there amidst the blasts of a bleak upland. corona mundi roof of the world all sorts of fantastic phrases sprang to our lips as we looked dizzily down at the unbelievable spectacle. i thought again of the eldritch primal myths that had so persistently haunted me since my first sight of this dead antarctic world of the demoniac plateau of leng, of the migo, or abominable snow men of the himalayas, of the pnakotic manuscripts with their prehuman implications, of the cthulhu cult, of the necronomicon, and of the hyperborean legends of formless tsathoggua and the worse than formless star spawn associated with that semientity. for boundless miles in every direction the thing stretched off with very little thinning; indeed, as our eyes followed it to the right and left along the base of the low, gradual foothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim, we decided that we could see no thinning at all except for an interruption at the left of the pass through which we had come. we had merely struck, at random, a limited part of something of incalculable extent. the foothills were more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, linking the terrible city to the already familiar cubes and ramparts which evidently formed its mountain outposts. these latter, as well as the queer cave mouths, were as thick on the inner as on the outer sides of the mountains. the whole tangle was monstrously weathered, and the glacial surface from which the towers projected was strewn with fallen blocks and immemorial debris. where the glaciation was transparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic piles, and we noticed the icepreserved stone bridges which connected the different towers at varying distances above the ground. on the exposed walls we could detect the scarred places where other and higher bridges of the same sort had existed. closer inspection revealed countless largish windows; some of which were closed with shutters of a petrified material originally wood, though most gaped open in a sinister and menacing fashion. many of the ruins, of course, were roofless, and with uneven though windrounded upper edges; whilst others, of a more sharply conical or pyramidal model or else protected by higher surrounding structures, preserved intact outlines despite the omnipresent crumbling and pitting. with the field glass we could barely make out what seemed to be sculptural decorations in horizontal bands decorations including those curious groups of dots whose presence on the ancient soapstones now assumed a vastly larger significance. in many places the buildings were totally ruined and the ice sheet deeply riven from various geologic causes. in other places the stonework was worn down to the very level of the glaciation. one broad swath, extending from the plateaus interior, to a cleft in the foothills about a mile to the left of the pass we had traversed, was wholly free from buildings. it probably represented, we concluded, the course of some great river which in tertiary times millions of years ago had poured through the city and into some prodigious subterranean abyss of the great barrier range. certainly, this was above all a region of caves, gulfs, and underground secrets beyond human penetration. looking back to our sensations, and recalling our dazedness at viewing this monstrous survival from aeons we had thought prehuman, i can only wonder that we preserved the semblance of equilibrium, which we did. of course, we knew that something chronology, scientific theory, or our own consciousness was woefully awry; yet we kept enough poise to guide the plane, observe many things quite minutely, and take a careful series of photographs which may yet serve both us and the world in good stead. in my case, ingrained scientific habit may have helped; for above all my bewilderment and sense of menace, there burned a dominant curiosity to fathom more of this ageold secret to know what sort of beings had built and lived in this incalculably gigantic place, and what relation to the general world of its time or of other times so unique a concentration of life could have had. for this place could be no ordinary city. it must have formed the primary nucleus and center of some archaic and unbelievable chapter of earths history whose outward ramifications, recalled only dimly in the most obscure and distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst the chaos of terrene convulsions long before any human race we know had shambled out of apedom. here sprawled a palaeogaean megalopolis compared with which the fabled atlantis and lemuria, commoriom and uzuldaroum, and olathoc in the land of lomar, are recent things of today not even of yesterday; a megalopolis ranking with such whispered prehuman blasphemies as valusia, rlyeh, ib in the land of mnar, and the nameless city of arabia deserta. as we flew above that tangle of stark titan towers my imagination sometimes escaped all bounds and roved aimlessly in realms of fantastic associations even weaving links betwixt this lost world and some of my own wildest dreams concerning the mad horror at the camp. the planes fuel tank, in the interest of greater lightness, had been only partly filled; hence we now had to exert caution in our explorations. even so, however, we covered an enormous extent of ground or, rather, air after swooping down to a level where the wind became virtually negligible. there seemed to be no limit to the mountain range, or to the length of the frightful stone city which bordered its inner foothills. fifty miles of flight in each direction showed no major change in the labyrinth of rock and masonry that clawed up corpselike through the eternal ice. there were, though, some highly absorbing diversifications; such as the carvings on the canyon where that broad river had once pierced the foothills and approached its sinking place in the great range. the headlands at the streams entrance had been boldly carved into cyclopean pylons; and something about the ridgy, barrelshaped designs stirred up oddly vague, hateful, and confusing semiremembrances in both danforth and me. we also came upon several starshaped open spaces, evidently public squares, and noted various undulations in the terrain. where a sharp hill rose, it was generally hollowed out into some sort of ramblingstone edifice; but there were at least two exceptions. of these latter, one was too badly weathered to disclose what had been on the jutting eminence, while the other still bore a fantastic conical monument carved out of the solid rock and roughly resembling such things as the wellknown snake tomb in the ancient valley of petra. flying inland from the mountains, we discovered that the city was not of infinite width, even though its length along the foothills seemed endless. after about thirty miles the grotesque stone buildings began to thin out, and in ten more miles we came to an unbroken waste virtually without signs of sentient artifice. the course of the river beyond the city seemed marked by a broad, depressed line, while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness, seeming to slope slightly upward as it receded in the misthazed west. it did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a snow banking for so brief a time and in so comfortable an absence of high winds at this level; hence we merely saw that the landing skis were safely lodged, and that the vital parts of the mechanism were guarded against the cold. for our foot journey we discarded the heaviest of our flying furs, and took with us a small outfit consisting of pocket compass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminous notebooks and paper, geologists hammer and chisel, specimen bags, coil of climbing rope, and powerful electric torches with extra batteries; this equipment having been carried in the plane on the chance that we might be able to effect a landing, take ground pictures, make drawings and topographical sketches, and obtain rock specimens from some bare slope, outcropping, or mountain cave. fortunately we had a supply of extra paper to tear up, place in a spare specimen bag, and use on the ancient principle of hare and hounds for marking our course in any interior mazes we might be able to penetrate. this had been brought in case we found some cave system with air quiet enough to allow such a rapid and easy method in place of the usual rockchipping method of trail blazing. walking cautiously downhill over the crusted snow toward the stupendous stone labyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as keen a sense of imminent marvels as we had felt on approaching the unfathomed mountain pass four hours previously. true, we had become visually familiar with the incredible secret concealed by the barrier peaks; yet the prospect of actually entering primordial walls reared by conscious beings perhaps millions of years ago before any known race of men could have existed was none the less awesome and potentially terrible in its implications of cosmic abnormality. though the thinness of the air at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat more difficult than usual, both danforth and i found ourselves bearing up very well, and felt equal to almost any task which might fall to our lot. it took only a few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level with the snow, while ten or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge, roofless rampart still complete in its gigantic fivepointed outline and rising to an irregular height of ten or eleven feet. for this latter we headed; and when at last we were actually able to touch its weathered cyclopean blocks, we felt that we had established an unprecedented and almost blasphemous link with forgotten aeons normally closed to our species. we crawled through one of the windows and vainly tried to decipher the nearly effaced mural designs, but did not attempt to disturb the glaciated floor. our orientation flights had indicated that many buildings in the city proper were less icechoked, and that we might perhaps find wholly clear interiors leading down to the true ground level if we entered those structures still roofed at the top. before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully, and studied its mortarless cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment. we wished that pabodie were present, for his engineering knowledge might have helped us guess how such titanic blocks could have been handled in that unbelievably remote age when the city and its outskirts were built up. the halfmile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind shrieking vainly and savagely through the skyward peaks in the background, was something of which the smallest details will always remain engraved on my mind. only in fantastic nightmares could any human beings but danforth and me conceive such optical effects. between us and the churning vapors of the west lay that monstrous tangle of dark stone towers, its outre and incredible forms impressing us afresh at every new angle of vision. it was a mirage in solid stone, and were it not for the photographs, i would still doubt that such a thing could be. the general type of masonry was identical with that of the rampart we had examined; but the extravagant shapes which this masonry took in its urban manifestations were past all description. even the pictures illustrate only one or two phases of its endless variety, preternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism. there were geometrical forms for which an euclid would scarcely find a name cones of all degrees of irregularity and truncation, terraces of every sort of provocative disproportion, shafts with odd bulbous enlargements, broken columns in curious groups, and fivepointed or fiveridged arrangements of mad grotesqueness. as we drew nearer we could see beneath certain transparent parts of the ice sheet, and detect some of the tubular stone bridges that connected the crazily sprinkled structures at various heights. of orderly streets there seemed to be none, the only broad open swath being a mile to the left, where the ancient river had doubtless flowed through the town into the mountains. our field glasses showed the external, horizontal bands of nearly effaced sculptures and dot groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what the city must once have looked like even though most of the roofs and tower tops had necessarily perished. as a whole, it had been a complex tangle of twisted lanes and alleys, all of them deep canyons, and some little better than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry or overarching bridges. now, outspread below us, it loomed like a dream fantasy against a westward mist through whose northern end the low, reddish antarctic sun of early afternoon was struggling to shine; and when, for a moment, that sun encountered a denser obstruction and plunged the scene into temporary shadow, the effect was subtly menacing in a way i can never hope to depict. even the faint howling and piping of the unfelt wind in the great mountain passes behind us took on a wilder note of purposeful malignity. the last stage of our descent to the town was unusually steep and abrupt, and a rock outcropping at the edge where the grade changed led us to think that an artificial terrace had once existed there. under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight of steps or its equivalent. when at last we plunged into the town itself, clambering over fallen masonry and shrinking from the oppressive nearness and dwarfing height of omnipresent crumbling and pitted walls, our sensations again became such that i marvel at the amount of selfcontrol we retained. danforth was frankly jumpy, and began making some offensively irrelevant speculations about the horror at the camp which i resented all the more because i could not help sharing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid survival from nightmare antiquity. the speculations worked on his imagination, too; for in one place where a debrislittered alley turned a sharp corner he insisted that he saw faint traces of ground markings which he did not like; whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a subtle, imaginary sound from some undefined point a muffled musical piping, he said, not unlike that of the wind in the mountain caves, yet somehow disturbingly different. the ceaseless fivepointedness of the surrounding architecture and of the few distinguishable mural arabesques had a dimly sinister suggestiveness we could not escape, and gave us a touch of terrible subconscious certainty concerning the primal entities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place. nevertheless, our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead, and we mechanically carried out our program of chipping specimens from all the different rock types represented in the masonry. we wished a rather full set in order to draw better conclusions regarding the age of the place. nothing in the great outer walls seemed to date from later than the jurassic and comanchian periods, nor was any piece of stone in the entire place of a greater recency than the pliocene age. in stark certainty, we were wandering amidst a death which had reigned at least five hundred thousand years, and in all probability even longer. as we proceeded through this maze of stoneshadowed twilight we stopped at all available apertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities. some were above our reach, whilst others led only into icechoked ruins as unroofed and barren as the rampart on the hill. one, though spacious and inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abyss without visible means of descent. now and then we had a chance to study the petrified wood of a surviving shutter, and were impressed by the fabulous antiquity implied in the still discernible grain. these things had come from mesozoic gymnosperms and conifers especially cretaceous cycads and from fan palms and early angiosperms of plainly tertiary date. nothing definitely later than the pliocene could be discovered. in the placing of these shutters whose edges showed the former presence of queer and longvanished hinges usage seemed to be varied some being on the outer and some on the inner side of the deep embrasures. they seemed to have become wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of their former and probably metallic fixtures and fastenings. after a time we came across a row of windows in the bulges of a colossal fiveedged cone of undamaged apex which led into a vast, wellpreserved room with stone flooring; but these were too high in the room to permit descent without a rope. we had a rope with us, but did not wish to bother with this twentyfoot drop unless obliged toespecially in this thin plateau air where great demands were made upon the heart action. this enormous room was probably a hall or concourse of some sort, and our electric torches showed bold, distinct, and potentially startling sculptures arranged round the walls in broad, horizontal bands separated by equally broad strips of conventional arabesques. we took careful note of this spot, planning to enter here unless a more easily gained interior were encountered. finally, though, we did encounter exactly the opening we wished; an archway about six feet wide and ten feet high, marking the former end of an aerial bridge which had spanned an alley about five feet above the present level of glaciation. these archways, of course, were flush with upperstory floors, and in this case one of the floors still existed. the building thus accessible was a series of rectangular terraces on our left facing westward. that across the alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder with no windows and with a curious bulge about ten feet above the aperture. it was totally dark inside, and the archway seemed to open on a well of illimitable emptiness. heaped debris made the entrance to the vast lefthand building doubly easy, yet for a moment we hesitated before taking advantage of the longwished chance. for though we had penetrated into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required fresh resolution to carry us actually inside a complete and surviving building of a fabulous elder world whose nature was becoming more and more hideously plain to us. in the end, however, we made the plunge, and scrambled up over the rubble into the gaping embrasure. the floor beyond was of great slate slabs, and seemed to form the outlet of a long, high corridor with sculptured walls. observing the many inner archways which led off from it, and realizing the probable complexity of the nest of apartments within, we decided that we must begin our system of hareandhound trail blazing. hitherto our compasses, together with frequent glimpses of the vast mountain range between the towers in our rear, had been enough to prevent our losing our way; but from now on, the artificial substitute would be necessary. accordingly we reduced our extra paper to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a bag to be carried by danforth, and prepared to use them as economically as safety would allow. this method would probably gain us immunity from straying, since there did not appear to be any strong air currents inside the primordial masonry. if such should develop, or if our paper supply should give out, we could of course fall back on the more secure though more tedious and retarding method of rock chipping. just how extensive a territory we had opened up, it was impossible to guess without a trial. the close and frequent connection of the different buildings made it likely that we might cross from one to another on bridges underneath the ice, except where impeded by local collapses and geologic rifts, for very little glaciation seemed to have entered the massive constructions. almost all the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows as tightly shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform state until the glacial sheet came to crystallize the lower part for all succeeding time. indeed, one gained a curious impression that this place had been deliberately closed and deserted in some dim, bygone aeon, rather than overwhelmed by any sudden calamity or even gradual decay. had the coming of the ice been foreseen, and had a nameless population left en masse to seek a less doomed abode? the precise physiographic conditions attending the formation of the ice sheet at this point would have to wait for later solution. it had not, very plainly, been a grinding drive. perhaps the pressure of accumulated snows had been responsible, and perhaps some flood from the river, or from the bursting of some ancient glacial dam in the great range, had helped to create the special state now observable. imagination could conceive almost anything in connection with this place. vi it would be cumbrous to give a detailed, consecutive account of our wanderings inside that cavernous, aeondead honeycomb of primal masonry that monstrous lair of elder secrets which now echoed for the first time, after uncounted epochs, to the tread of human feet. this is especially true because so much of the horrible drama and revelation came from a mere study of the omnipresent mural carvings. our flashlight photographs of those carvings will do much toward proving the truth of what we are now disclosing, and it is lamentable that we had not a larger film supply with us. as it was, we made crude notebook sketches of certain salient features after all our films were used up. we cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous balancing and adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function of the arch was clearly much relied on. the rooms we visited were wholly bare of all portable contents, a circumstance which sustained our belief in the citys deliberate desertion. the prime decorative feature was the almost universal system of mural sculpture, which tended to run in continuous horizontal bands three feet wide and arranged from floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of equal width given over to geometrical arabesques. there were exceptions to this rule of arrangement, but its preponderance was overwhelming. often, however, a series of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groups of dots would be sunk along one of the arabesque bands. the technique, we soon saw, was mature, accomplished, and aesthetically evolved to the highest degree of civilized mastery, though utterly alien in every detail to any known art tradition of the human race. in delicacy of execution no sculpture i have ever seen could approach it. the minutest details of elaborate vegetation, or of animal life, were rendered with astonishing vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings; whilst the conventional designs were marvels of skillful intricacy. the arabesques displayed a profound use of mathematical principles, and were made up of obscurely symmetrical curves and angles based on the quantity of five. the pictorial bands followed a highly formalized tradition, and involved a peculiar treatment of perspective, but had an artistic force that moved us profoundly, notwithstanding the intervening gulf of vast geologic periods. their method of design hinged on a singular juxtaposition of the cross section with the twodimensional silhouette, and embodied an analytical psychology beyond that of any known race of antiquity. it is useless to try to compare this art with any represented in our museums. those who see our photographs will probably find its closest analogue in certain grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists. the arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines, whose depth on unweathered walls varied from one to two inches. when cartouches with dot groups appeared evidently as inscriptions in some unknown and primordial language and alphabet the depression of the smooth surface was perhaps an inch and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half inch more. the pictorial bands were in countersunk low relief, their background being depressed about two inches from the original wall surface. in some specimens marks of a former coloration could be detected, though for the most part the untold aeons had disintegrated and banished any pigments which may have been applied. the more one studied the marvelous technique, the more one admired the things. beneath their strict conventionalization one could grasp the minute and accurate observation and graphic skill of the artists; and indeed, the very conventions themselves served to symbolize and accentuate the real essence or vital differentiation of every object delineated. we felt, too, that besides these recognizable excellences there were others lurking beyond the reach of our perceptions. certain touches here and there gave vague hints of latent symbols and stimuli which another mental and emotional background, and a fuller or different sensory equipment, might have made of profound and poignant significance to us. the subject matter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the vanished epoch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident history. it is this abnormal historicmindedness of the primal race a chance circumstance operating, through coincidence, miraculously in our favor which made the carvings so awesomely informative to us, and which caused us to place their photography and transcription above all other considerations. in certain rooms the dominant arrangement was varied by the presence of maps, astronomical charts, and other scientific designs of an enlarged scale these things giving a naive and terrible corroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial friezes and dadoes. in hinting at what the whole revealed, i can only hope that my account will not arouse a curiosity greater than sane caution on the part of those who believe me at all. it would be tragic if any were to be allured to that realm of death and horror by the very warning meant to discourage them. interrupting these sculptured walls were high windows and massive twelvefoot doorways; both now and then retaining the petrified wooden planks elaborately carved and polishedof the actual shutters and doors. all metal fixtures had long ago vanished, but some of the doors remained in place and had to be forced aside as we progressed from room to room. window frames with odd transparent panes mostly elliptical survived here and there, though in no considerable quantity. there were also frequent niches of great magnitude, generally empty, but once in a while containing some bizarre object carved from green soapstone which was either broken or perhaps held too inferior to warrant removal. other apertures were undoubtedly connected with bygone mechanical facilities heating, lighting, and the likeof a sort suggested in many of the carvings. ceilings tended to be plain, but had sometimes been inlaid with green soapstone or other tiles, mostly fallen now. floors were also paved with such tiles, though plain stonework predominated. as i have said, all furniture and other movables were absent; but the sculptures gave a clear idea of the strange devices which had once filled these tomblike, echoing rooms. above the glacial sheet the floors were generally thick with detritus, litter, and debris, but farther down this condition decreased. in some of the lower chambers and corridors there was little more than gritty dust or ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an uncanny air of newly swept immaculateness. of course, where rifts or collapses had occurred, the lower levels were as littered as the upper ones. a central court as in other structures we had seen from the air saved the inner regions from total darkness; so that we seldom had to use our electric torches in the upper rooms except when studying sculptured details. below the ice cap, however, the twilight deepened; and in many parts of the tangled ground level there was an approach to absolute blackness. to form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as we penetrated this aeonsilent maze of unhuman masonry, one must correlate a hopelessly bewildering chaos of fugitive moods, memories, and impressions. the sheer appalling antiquity and lethal desolation of the place were enough to overwhelm almost any sensitive person, but added to these elements were the recent unexplained horror at the camp, and the revelations all too soon effected by the terrible mural sculptures around us. the moment we came upon a perfect section of carving, where no ambiguity of interpretation could exist, it took only a brief study to give us the hideous truth a truth which it would be naive to claim danforth and i had not independently suspected before, though we had carefully refrained from even hinting it to each other. there could now be no further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings which had built and inhabited this monstrous dead city millions of years ago, when mans ancestors were primitive archaic mammals, and vast dinosaurs roamed the tropical steppes of europe and asia. we had previously clung to a desperate alternative and insisted each to himself that the omnipresence of the fivepointed motifs meant only some cultural or religious exaltation of the archaean natural object which had so patently embodied the quality of fivepointedness; as the decorative motifs of minoan crete exalted the sacred bull, those of egypt the scarabaeus, those of rome the wolf and the eagle, and those of various savage tribes some chosen totem animal. but this lone refuge was now stripped from us, and we were forced to face definitely the reasonshaking realization which the reader of these pages has doubtless long ago anticipated. i can scarcely bear to write it down in black and white even now, but perhaps that will not be necessary. the things once rearing and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age of dinosaurs were not indeed dinosaurs, but far worse. mere dinosaurs were new and almost brainless objects but the builders of the city were wise and old, and had left certain traces in rocks even then laid down well nigh a thousand million years rocks laid down before the true life of earth had advanced beyond plastic groups of cells rocks laid down before the true life of earth had existed at all. they were the makers and enslavers of that life, and above all doubt the originals of the fiendish elder myths which things like the pnakotic manuscripts and the necronomicon affrightedly hint about. they were the great old ones that had filtered down from the stars when earth was young the beings whose substance an alien evolution had shaped, and whose powers were such as this planet had never bred. and to think that only the day before danforth and i had actually looked upon fragments of their millennially fossilized substance and that poor lake and his party had seen their complete outlines it is of course impossible for me to relate in proper order the stages by which we picked up what we know of that monstrous chapter of prehuman life. after the first shock of the certain revelation, we had to pause a while to recuperate, and it was fully three oclock before we got started on our actual tour of systematic research. the sculptures in the building we entered were of relatively late date perhaps two million years agoas checked up by geological, biological, and astronomical features and embodied an art which would be called decadent in comparison with that of specimens we found in older buildings after crossing bridges under the glacial sheet. one edifice hewn from the solid rock seemed to go back forty or possibly even fifty million years to the lower eocene or upper cretaceous and contained basreliefs of an artistry surpassing anything else, with one tremendous exception, that we encountered. that was, we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed. were it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, i would refrain from telling what i found and inferred, lest i be confined as a madman. of course, the infinitely early parts of the patchwork tale representing the preterrestrial life of the starheaded beings on other planets, in other galaxies, and in other universes can readily be interpreted as the fantastic mythology of those beings themselves; yet such parts sometimes involved designs and diagrams so uncannily close to the latest findings of mathematics and astrophysics that i scarcely know what to think. let others judge when they see the photographs i shall publish. naturally, no one set of carvings which we encountered told more than a fraction of any connected story, nor did we even begin to come upon the various stages of that story in their proper order. some of the vast rooms were independent units so far as their designs were concerned, whilst in other cases a continuous chronicle would be carried through a series of rooms and corridors. the best of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful abyss below even the ancient ground level a cavern perhaps two hundred feet square and sixty feet high, which had almost undoubtedly been an educational center of some sort. there were many provoking repetitions of the same material in different rooms and buildings, since certain chapters of experience, and certain summaries or phases of racial history, had evidently been favorites with different decorators or dwellers. sometimes, though, variant versions of the same theme proved useful in settling debatable points and filling up gaps. i still wonder that we deduced so much in the short time at our disposal. of course, we even now have only the barest outline and much of that was obtained later on from a study of the photographs and sketches we made. it may be the effect of this later study the revived memories and vague impressions acting in conjunction with his general sensitiveness and with that final supposed horrorglimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me which has been the immediate source of danforths present breakdown. but it had to be; for we could not issue our warning intelligently without the fullest possible information, and the issuance of that warning is a prime necessity. certain lingering influences in that unknown antarctic world of disordered time and alien natural law make it imperative that further exploration be discouraged. vii the full story, so far as deciphered, will eventually appear in an official bulletin of miskatonic university. here i shall sketch only the salient highlights in a formless, rambling way. myth or otherwise, the sculptures told of the coming of those starheaded things to the nascent, lifeless earth out of cosmic space their coming, and the coming of many other alien entities such as at certain times embark upon spatial pioneering. they seemed able to traverse the interstellar ether on their vast membranous wings thus oddly confirming some curious hill folklore long ago told me by an antiquarian colleague. they had lived under the sea a good deal, building fantastic cities and fighting terrific battles with nameless adversaries by means of intricate devices employing unknown principles of energy. evidently their scientific and mechanical knowledge far surpassed mans today, though they made use of its more widespread and elaborate forms only when obliged to. some of the sculptures suggested that they had passed through a stage of mechanized life on other planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally unsatisfying. their preternatural toughness of organization and simplicity of natural wants made them peculiarly able to live on a high plane without the more specialized fruits of artificial manufacture, and even without garments, except for occasional protection against the elements. it was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purposes, that they first created earth life using available substances according to longknown methods. the more elaborate experiments came after the annihilation of various cosmic enemies. they had done the same thing on other planets, having manufactured not only necessary foods, but certain multicellular protoplasmic masses capable of molding their tissues into all sorts of temporary organs under hypnotic influence and thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy work of the community. these viscous masses were without doubt what abdul alhazred whispered about as the shoggoths in his frightful necronomicon, though even that mad arab had not hinted that any existed on earth except in the dreams of those who had chewed a certain alkaloidal herb. when the starheaded old ones on this planet had synthesized their simple food forms and bred a good supply of shoggoths, they allowed other cell groups to develop into other forms of animal and vegetable life for sundry purposes, extirpating any whose presence became troublesome. with the aid of the shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift prodigious weights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and imposing labyrinths of stone not unlike those which later rose on land. indeed, the highly adaptable old ones had lived much on land in other parts of the universe, and probably retained many traditions of land construction. as we studied the architecture of all these sculptured palaeogean cities, including that whose aeondead corridors we were even then traversing, we were impressed by a curious coincidence which we have not yet tried to explain, even to ourselves. the tops of the buildings, which in the actual city around us had, of course, been weathered into shapeless ruins ages ago, were clearly displayed in the basreliefs, and showed vast clusters of needlelike spires, delicate finials on certain cone and pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal scalloped disks capping cylindrical shafts. this was exactly what we had seen in that monstrous and portentous mirage, cast by a dead city whence such skyline features had been absent for thousands and tens of thousands of years, which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfathomed mountains of madness as we first approached poor lakes illfated camp. of the life of the old ones, both under the sea and after part of them migrated to land, volumes could be written. those in shallow water had continued the fullest use of the eyes at the ends of their five main head tentacles, and had practiced the arts of sculpture and of writing in quite the usual way the writing accomplished with a stylus on waterproof waxen surfaces. those lower down in the ocean depths, though they used a curious phosphorescent organism to furnish light, pieced out their vision with obscure special senses operating through the prismatic cilia on their heads senses which rendered all the old ones partly independent of light in emergencies. their forms of sculpture and writing had changed curiously during the descent, embodying certain apparently chemical coating processes probably to secure phosphorescence which the basreliefs could not make clear to us. the beings moved in the sea partly by swimming using the lateral crinoid arms and partly by wriggling with the lower tier of tentacles containing the pseudofeet. occasionally they accomplished long swoops with the auxiliary use of two or more sets of their fanlike folding wings. on land they locally used the pseudofeet, but now and then flew to great heights or over long distances with their wings. the many slender tentacles into which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely delicate, flexible, strong, and accurate in muscularnervous coordination ensuring the utmost skill and dexterity in all artistic and other manual operations. the toughness of the things was almost incredible. even the terrific pressure of the deepest sea bottoms appeared powerless to harm them. very few seemed to die at all except by violence, and their burial places were very limited. the fact that they covered their vertically inhumed dead with fivepointed inscribed mounds set up thoughts in danforth and me which made a fresh pause and recuperation necessary after the sculptures revealed it. the beings multiplied by means of spores like vegetable pteridophytes, as lake had suspected but, owing to their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent lack of replacement needs, they did not encourage the largescale development of new prothallia except when they had new regions to colonize. the young matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any standard we can imagine. the prevailing intellectual and aesthetic life was highly evolved, and produced a tenaciously enduring set of customs and institutions which i shall describe more fully in my coming monograph. these varied slightly according to sea or land residence, but had the same foundations and essentials. though able, like vegetables, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances, they vastly preferred organic and especially animal food. they ate uncooked marine life under the sea, but cooked their viands on land. they hunted game and raised meat herds slaughtering with sharp weapons whose odd marks on certain fossil bones our expedition had noted. they resisted all ordinary temperatures marvelously, and in their natural state could live in water down to freezing. when the great chill of the pleistocene drew on, however nearly a million years agothe land dwellers had to resort to special measures, including artificial heating until at last the deadly cold appears to have driven them back into the sea. for their prehistoric flights through cosmic space, legend said, they absorbed certain chemicals and became almost independent of eating, breathing, or heat conditions but by the time of the great cold they had lost track of the method. in any case they could not have prolonged the artificial state indefinitely without harm. being nonpairing and semivegetable in structure, the old ones had no biological basis for the family phase of mammal life, but seemed to organize large households on the principles of comfortable spaceutility and as we deduced from the pictured occupations and diversions of codwellers congenial mental association. in furnishing their homes they kept everything in the center of the huge rooms, leaving all the wall spaces free for decorative treatment. lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was accomplished by a device probably electrochemical in nature. both on land and under water they used curious tables, chairs and couches like cylindrical frames for they rested and slept upright with foldeddown tentacles and racks for hinged sets of dotted surfaces forming their books. government was evidently complex and probably socialistic, though no certainties in this regard could be deduced from the sculptures we saw. there was extensive commerce, both local and between different cities certain small, flat counters, fivepointed and inscribed, serving as money. probably the smaller of the various greenish soapstones found by our expedition were pieces of such currency. though the culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and much stock raising existed. mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were also practiced. travel was very frequent, but permanent migration seemed relatively rare except for the vast colonizing movements by which the race expanded. for personal locomotion no external aid was used, since in land, air, and water movement alike the old ones seemed to possess excessively vast capacities for speed. loads, however, were drawn by beasts of burden shoggoths under the sea, and a curious variety of primitive vertebrates in the later years of land existence. these vertebrates, as well as an infinity of other life forms animal and vegetable, marine, terrestrial, and aerial were the products of unguided evolution acting on life cells made by the old ones, but escaping beyond their radius of attention. they had been suffered to develop unchecked because they had not come in conflict with the dominant beings. bothersome forms, of course, were mechanically exterminated. it interested us to see in some of the very last and most decadent sculptures a shambling, primitive mammal, used sometimes for food and sometimes as an amusing buffoon by the land dwellers, whose vaguely simian and human foreshadowings were unmistakable. in the building of land cities the huge stone blocks of the high towers were generally lifted by vastwinged pterodactyls of a species heretofore unknown to paleontology. the persistence with which the old ones survived various geologic changes and convulsions of the earths crust was little short of miraculous. though few or none of their first cities seem to have remained beyond the archaean age, there was no interruption in their civilization or in the transmission of their records. their original place of advent to the planet was the antarctic ocean, and it is likely that they came not long after the matter forming the moon was wrenched from the neighboring south pacific. according to one of the sculptured maps the whole globe was then under water, with stone cities scattered farther and farther from the antarctic as aeons passed. another map shows a vast bulk of dry land around the south pole, where it is evident that some of the beings made experimental settlements, though their main centers were transferred to the nearest sea bottom. later maps, which display the land mass as cracking and drifting, and sending certain detached parts northward, uphold in a striking way the theories of continental drift lately advanced by taylor, wegener, and joly. with the upheaval of new land in the south pacific tremendous events began. some of the marine cities were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst misfortune. another race a land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably corresponding to fabulous prehuman spawn of cthulhu soon began filtering down from cosmic infinity and precipitated a monstrous war which for a time drove the old ones wholly back to the sea a colossal blow in view of the increasing land settlements. later peace was made, and the new lands were given to the cthulhu spawn whilst the old ones held the sea and the older lands. new land cities were founded the greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region of first arrival was sacred. from then on, as before, the antarctic remained the center of the old ones civilization, and all the cities built there by the cthulhu spawn were blotted out. then suddenly the lands of the pacific sank again, taking with them the frightful stone city of rlyeh and all the cosmic octopi, so that the old ones were again supreme on the planet except for one shadowy fear about which they did not like to speak. at a rather later age their cities dotted all the land and water areas of the globe hence the recommendation in my coming monograph that some archaeologist make systematic borings with pabodies type of apparatus in certain widely separated regions. the steady trend down the ages was from water to land a movement encouraged by the rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly deserted. another cause of the landward movement was the new difficulty in breeding and managing the shoggoths upon which successful sea life depended. with the march of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, the art of creating new life from inorganic matter had been lost, so that the old ones had to depend on the molding of forms already in existence. on land the great reptiles proved highly tractable; but the shoggoths of the sea, reproducing by fission and acquiring a dangerous degree of accidental intelligence, presented for a time a formidable problem. they had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestions of the old ones, and had modeled their tough plasticity into various useful temporary limbs and organs; but now their selfmodeling powers were sometimes exercised independently, and in various imitative forms implanted by past suggestion. they had, it seems, developed a semistable brain whose separate and occasionally stubborn volition echoed the will of the old ones without always obeying it. sculptured images of these shoggoths filled danforth and me with horror and loathing. they were normally shapeless entities composed of a viscous jelly which looked like an agglutination of bubbles, and each averaged about fifteen feet in diameter when a sphere. they had, however, a constantly shifting shape and volume throwing out temporary developments or forming apparent organs of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation of their masters, either spontaneously or according to suggestion. they seem to have become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the permian age, perhaps one hundred and fifty million years ago, when a veritable war of resubjugation was waged upon them by the marine old ones. pictures of this war, and of the headless, slimecoated fashion in which the shoggoths typically left their slain victims, held a marvelously fearsome quality despite the intervening abyss of untold ages. the old ones had used curious weapons of molecular and atomic disturbances against the rebel entities, and in the end had achieved a complete victory. thereafter the sculptures showed a period in which shoggoths were tamed and broken by armed old ones as the wild horses of the american west were tamed by cowboys. though during the rebellion the shoggoths had shown an ability to live out of water, this transition was not encouraged since their usefulness on land would hardly have been commensurate with the trouble of their management. during the jurassic age the old ones met fresh adversity in the form of a new invasion from outer space this time by halffungous, halfcrustacean creatures creatures undoubtedly the same as those figuring in certain whispered hill legends of the north, and remembered in the himalayas as the migo, or abominable snow men. to fight these beings the old ones attempted, for the first time since their terrene advent, to sally forth again into the planetary ether; but, despite all traditional preparations, found it no longer possible to leave the earths atmosphere. whatever the old secret of interstellar travel had been, it was now definitely lost to the race. in the end the migo drove the old ones out of all the northern lands, though they were powerless to disturb those in the sea. little by little the slow retreat of the elder race to their original antarctic habitat was beginning. it was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the cthulhu spawn and the migo seem to have been composed of matter more widely different from that which we know than was the substance of the old ones. they were able to undergo transformations and reintegrations impossible for their adversaries, and seem therefore to have originally come from even remoter gulfs of the cosmic space. the old ones, but for their abnormal toughness and peculiar vital properties, were strictly material, and must have had their absolute origin within the known spacetime continuum whereas the first sources of the other beings can only be guessed at with bated breath. all this, of course, assuming that the nonterrestrial linkages and the anomalies ascribed to the invading foes are not pure mythology. conceivably, the old ones might have invented a cosmic framework to account for their occasional defeats, since historical interest and pride obviously formed their chief psychological element. it is significant that their annals failed to mention many advanced and potent races of beings whose mighty cultures and towering cities figure persistently in certain obscure legends. the changing state of the world through long geologic ages appeared with startling vividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes. in certain cases existing science will require revision, while in other cases its bold deductions are magnificently confirmed. as i have said, the hypothesis of taylor, wegener, and joly that all the continents are fragments of an original antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal force and drifted apart over a technically viscous lower surface an hypothesis suggested by such things as the complementary outlines of africa and south america, and the way the great mountain chains are rolled and shoved up receives striking support from this uncanny source. maps evidently showing the carboniferous world of an hundred million or more years ago displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to separate africa from the once continuous realms of europe (then the valusia of primal legend), asia, the americas, and the antarctic continent. other charts and most significantly one in connection with the founding fifty million years ago of the vast dead city around us showed all the present continents well differentiated. and in the latest discoverable specimen dating perhaps from the pliocene age the approximate world of today appeared quite clearly despite the linkage of alaska with siberia, of north america with europe through greenland, and of south america with the antarctic continent through graham land. in the carboniferous map the whole globeocean floor and rifted land mass alike bore symbols of the old ones vast stone cities, but in the later charts the gradual recession toward the antarctic became very plain. the final pliocene specimen showed no land cities except on the antarctic continent and the tip of south america, nor any ocean cities north of the fiftieth parallel of south latitude. knowledge and interest in the northern world, save for a study of coast lines probably made during long exploration flights on those fanlike membranous wings, had evidently declined to zero among the old ones. destruction of cities through the upthrust of mountains, the centrifugal rending of continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea bottom, and other natural causes, was a matter of common record; and it was curious to observe how fewer and fewer replacements were made as the ages wore on. the vast dead megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the last general center of the race built early in the cretaceous age after a titanic earth buckling had obliterated a still vaster predecessor not far distant. it appeared that this general region was the most sacred spot of all, where reputedly the first old ones had settled on a primal sea bottom. in the new city many of whose features we could recognize in the sculptures, but which stretched fully a hundred miles along the mountain range in each direction beyond the farthest limits of our aerial survey there were reputed to be preserved certain sacred stones forming part of the first seabottom city, which thrust up to light after long epochs in the course of the general crumbling of strata. viii naturally, danforth and i studied with especial interest and a peculiarly personal sense of awe everything pertaining to the immediate district in which we were. of this local material there was naturally a vast abundance; and on the tangled ground level of the city we were lucky enough to find a house of very late date whose walls, though somewhat damaged by a neighboring rift, contained sculptures of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region much beyond the period of the pliocene map whence we derived our last general glimpse of the prehuman world. this was the last place we examined in detail, since what we found there gave us a fresh immediate objective. yet even more monstrous exaggerations of nature seemed disturbingly close at hand. i have said that these peaks are higher than the himalayas, but the sculptures forbid me to say that they are earths highest. that grim honor is beyond doubt reserved for something which half the sculptures hesitated to record at all, whilst others approached it with obvious repugnance and trepidation. it seems that there was one part of the ancient land the first part that ever rose from the waters after the earth had flung off the moon and the old ones had seeped down, from the stars which had come to be shunned as vaguely and namelessly evil. cities built there had crumbled before their time, and had been found suddenly deserted. then when the first great earth buckling had convulsed the region in the comanchian age, a frightful line of peaks had shot suddenly up amidst the most appalling din and chaos and earth had received her loftiest and most terrible mountains. some of the old ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to those mountains but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond. no human eye had ever seen them, and as i studied the emotions conveyed in the carvings, i prayed that none ever might. there are protecting hills along the coast beyond them queen mary and kaiser wilhelm lands and i thank heaven no one has been able to land and climb those hills. i am not as sceptical about old tales and fears as i used to be, and i do not laugh now at the prehuman sculptors notion that lightning paused meaningfully now and then at each of the brooding crests, and that an unexplained glow shone from one of those terrible pinnacles all through the long polar night. there may be a very real and very monstrous meaning in the old pnakotic whispers about kadath in the cold waste. but the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if less namelessly accursed. soon after the founding of the city the great mountain range became the seat of the principal temples, and many carvings showed what grotesque and fantastic towers had pierced the sky where now we saw only the curiously clinging cubes and ramparts. in the course of ages the caves had appeared, and had been shaped into adjuncts of the temples. with the advance of still later epochs, all the limestone veins of the region were hollowed out by ground waters, so that the mountains, the foothills, and the plains below them were a veritable network of connected caverns and galleries. many graphic sculptures told of explorations deep underground, and of the final discovery of the stygian sunless sea that lurked at earths bowels. this vast nighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which flowed down from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had formerly turned at the base of the old ones range and flowed beside that chain into the indian ocean between budd and totten lands on wilkess coast line. little by little it had eaten away the limestone hill base at its turning, till at last its sapping currents reached the caverns of the ground waters and joined with them in digging a deeper abyss. finally its whole bulk emptied into the hollow hills and left the old bed toward the ocean dry. much of the later city as we now found it had been built over that former bed. the old ones, understanding what had happened, and exercising their always keen artistic sense, had carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothills where the great stream began its descent into eternal darkness. this river, once crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly the one whose extinct course we had seen in our aeroplane survey. its position in different carvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the scene as it had been at various stages of the regions agelong, aeondead history, so that we were able to sketch a hasty but careful map of the salient features squares, important buildings, and the like for guidance in further explorations. we could soon reconstruct in fancy the whole stupendous thing as it was a million or ten million or fifty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactly what the buildings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting and luxuriant tertiary vegetation had looked like. it must have had a marvelous and mystic beauty, and as i thought of it, i almost forgot the clammy sense of sinister oppression with which the citys inhuman age and massiveness and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had choked and weighed on my spirit. yet according to certain carvings, the denizens of that city had themselves known the clutch of oppressive terror; for there was a somber and recurrent type of scene in which the old ones were shown in the act of recoiling affrightedly from some object never allowed to appear in the design found in the great river and indicated as having been washed down through waving, vinedraped cycad forests from those horrible westward mountains. it was only in the one latebuilt house with the decadent carvings that we obtained any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the citys desertion. undoubtedly there must have been many sculptures of the same age elsewhere, even allowing for the slackened energies and aspirations of a stressful and uncertain period; indeed, very certain evidence of the existence of others came to us shortly afterward. but this was the first and only set we directly encountered. we meant to look farther later on; but as i have said, immediate conditions dictated another present objective. there would, though, have been a limit for after all hope of a long future occupancy of the place had perished among the old ones, there could not but have been a complete cessation of mural decoration. the ultimate blow, of course, was the coming of the great cold which once held most of the earth in thrall, and which has never departed from the illfated poles the great cold that, at the worlds other extremity, put an end to the fabled lands of lomar and hyperborea. just when this tendency began in the antarctic, it would be hard to say in terms of exact years. nowadays we set the beginning of the general glacial periods at a distance of about five hundred thousand years from the present, but at the poles the terrible scourge must have commenced much earlier. all quantitative estimates are partly guesswork, but it is quite likely that the decadent sculptures were made considerably less than a million years ago, and that the actual desertion of the city was complete long before the conventional opening of the pleistocene five hundred thousand years ago as reckoned in terms of the earths whole surface. in the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation everywhere, and of a decreased country life on the part of the old ones. heating devices were shown in the houses, and winter travelers were represented as muffled in protective fabrics. then we saw a series of cartouches the continuous band arrangement being frequently interrupted in these late carvings depicting a constantly growing migration to the nearest refuges of greater warmth some fleeing to cities under the sea off the faraway coast, and some clambering down through networks of limestone caverns in the hollow hills to the neighboring black abyss of subterrene waters. in the end it seems to have been the neighboring abyss which received the greatest colonization. this was partly due, no doubt, to the traditional sacredness of this special region, but may have been more conclusively determined by the opportunities it gave for continuing the use of the great temples on the honeycombed mountains, and for retaining the vast land city as a place of summer residence and base of communication with various mines. the linkage of old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several gradings and improvements along the connecting routes, including the chiseling of numerous direct tunnels from the ancient metropolis to the black abyss sharply downpointing tunnels whose mouths we carefully drew, according to our most thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were compiling. it was obvious that at least two of these tunnels lay within a reasonable exploring distance of where we were both being on the mountainward edge of the city, one less than a quarter of a mile toward the ancient river course, and the other perhaps twice that distance in the opposite direction. the abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry land at certain places, but the old ones built their new city under water no doubt because of its greater certainty of uniform warmth. the depth of the hidden sea appears to have been very great, so that the earths internal heat could ensure its habitability for an indefinite period. the beings seemed to have had no trouble in adapting themselves to parttime and eventually, of course, wholetime residence under water, since they had never allowed their gill systems to atrophy. there were many sculptures which showed how they had always frequently visited their submarine kinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitually bathed on the deep bottom of their great river. the darkness of inner earth could likewise have been no deterrent to a race accustomed to long antarctic nights. decadent though their style undoubtedly was, these latest carvings had a truly epic quality where they told of the building of the new city in the cavern sea. the old ones had gone about it scientifically quarrying insoluble rocks from the heart of the honeycombed mountains, and employing expert workers from the nearest submarine city to perform the construction according to the best methods. these workers brought with them all that was necessary to establish the new venture shoggoth tissue from which to breed stone lifters and subsequent beasts of burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasmic matter to mold into phosphorescent organisms for lighting purposes. at last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that stygian sea, its architecture much like that of the city above, and its workmanship displaying relatively little decadence because of the precise mathematical element inherent in building operations. the newly bred shoggoths grew to enormous size and singular intelligence, and were represented as taking and executing orders with marvelous quickness. they seemed to converse with the old ones by mimicking their voices a sort of musical piping over a wide range, if poor lakes dissection had indicated aright and to work more from spoken commands than from hypnotic suggestions as in earlier times. they were, however, kept in admirable control. the phosphorescent organisms supplied light with vast effectiveness, and doubtless atoned for the loss of the familiar polar auroras of the outerworld night. art and decoration were pursued, though of course with a certain decadence. the old ones seemed to realize this falling off themselves, and in many cases anticipated the policy of constantine the great by transplanting especially fine blocks of ancient carving from their land city, just as the emperor, in a similar age of decline, stripped greece and asia of their finest art to give his new byzantine capital greater splendors than its own people could create. that the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensive was doubtless owing to the fact that the land city was not at first wholly abandoned. by the time total abandonment did occur and it surely must have occurred before the polar pleistocene was far advanced the old ones had perhaps become satisfied with their decadent art or had ceased to recognize the superior merit of the older carvings. at any rate, the aeonsilent ruins around us had certainly undergone no wholesale sculptural denudation, though all the best separate statues, like other movables, had been taken away. the decadent cartouches and dadoes telling this story were, as i have said, the latest we could find in our limited search. they left us with a picture of the old ones shuttling back and forth betwixt the land city in summer and the seacavern city in winter, and sometimes trading with the seabottom cities off the antarctic coast. by this time the ultimate doom of the land city must have been recognized, for the sculptures showed many signs of the colds malign encroachments. vegetation was declining, and the terrible snows of the winter no longer melted completely even in midsummer. the saunan livestock were nearly all dead, and the mammals were standing it none too well. to keep on with the work of the upper world it had become necessary to adapt some of the amorphous and curiously coldresistant shoggoths to land life a thing the old ones had formerly been reluctant to do. the great river was now lifeless, and the upper sea had lost most of its denizens except the seals and whales. all the birds had flown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins. what had happened afterward we could only guess. how long had the new seacavern city survived? was it still down there, a stony corpse in eternal blackness? had the subterranean waters frozen at last? to what fate had the oceanbottom cities of the outer world been delivered? had any of the old ones shifted north ahead of the creeping ice cap? existing geology shows no trace of their presence. had the frightful migo been still a menace in the outer land world of the north? could one be sure of what might or might not linger, even to this day, in the lightless and unplumbed abysses of earths deepest waters? those things had seemingly been able to withstand any amount of pressure and men of the sea have fished up curious objects at times. and has the killerwhale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars on antarctic seals noticed a generation ago by borchgrevingk? the specimens found by poor lake did not enter into these guesses, for their geologic setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very early date in the land citys history. they were, according to their location, certainly not less than thirty million years old, and we reflected that in their day the seacavern city, and indeed the cavern itself, had had no existence. they would have remembered an older scene, with lush tertiary vegetation everywhere, a younger land city of flourishing arts around them, and a great river sweeping northward along the base of the mighty mountains toward a faraway tropic ocean. and yet we could not help thinking about these specimens especially about the eight perfect ones that were missing from lakes hideously ravaged camp. there was something abnormal about that whole business the strange things we had tried so hard to lay to somebodys madness those frightful graves the amount and nature of the missing material gedney the unearthly toughness of those archaic monstrosities, and the queer vital freaks the sculptures now showed the race to have danforth and i had seen a good deal in the last few hours, and were prepared to believe and keep silent about many appalling and incredible secrets of primal nature. ix i have said that our study of the decadent sculptures brought about a change in our immediate objective. this, of course, had to do with the chiseled avenues to the black inner world, of whose existence we had not known before, but which we were now eager to find and traverse. from the evident scale of the carvings we deduced that a steeply descending walk of about a mile through either of the neighboring tunnels would bring us to the brink of the dizzy, sunless cliffs about the great abyss; down whose sides paths, improved by the old ones, led to the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted ocean. to behold this fabulous gulf in stark reality was a lure which seemed impossible of resistance once we knew of the thing yet we realized we must begin the quest at once if we expected to include it in our present trip. our supply of trailblazing paper was far from unlimited, and we were reluctant to sacrifice spare notebooks or sketching paper to augment it, but we did let one large notebook go. if worse came to worst we could resort to rock chipping and of course it would be possible, even in case of really lost direction, to work up to full daylight by one channel or another if granted sufficient time for plentiful trial and error. so at last we set off eagerly in the indicated direction of the nearest tunnel. according to the carvings from which we had made our map, the desired tunnel mouth could not be much more than a quarter of a mile from where we stood; the intervening space showing solidlooking buildings quite likely to be penetrable still at a subglacial level. the opening itself would be in the basement on the angle nearest the foothills of a vast fivepointed structure of evidently public and perhaps ceremonial nature, which we tried to identify from our aerial survey of the ruins. no such structure came to our minds as we recalled our flight, hence we concluded that its upper parts had been greatly damaged, or that it had been totally shattered in an ice rift we had noticed. in the latter case the tunnel would probably turn out to be choked, so that we would have to try the next nearest one the one less than a mile to the north. the intervening river course prevented our trying any of the more southern tunnels on this trip; and indeed, if both of the neighboring ones were choked it was doubtful whether our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next northerly one about a mile beyond our second choice. as we threaded our dim way through the labyrinth with the aid of map and compass traversing rooms and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation, clambering up ramps, crossing upper floors and bridges and clambering down again, encountering choked doorways and piles of debris, hastening now and then along finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking false leads and retracing our way (in such cases removing the blind paper trail we had left), and once in a while striking the bottom of an open shaft through which daylight poured or trickled down we were repeatedly tantalized by the sculptured walls along our route. many must have told tales of immense historical importance, and only the prospect of later visits reconciled us to the need of passing them by. as it was, we slowed down once in a while and turned on our second torch. if we had had more films, we would certainly have paused briefly to photograph certain basreliefs, but timeconsuming handcopying was clearly out of the question. of course the revelation was not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now. there were several conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of indecisive whispering. most important of all, we did not retreat without further investigation; for having come this far, we were loath to be balked by anything short of certain disaster. anyway, what we must have suspected was altogether too wild to believe. such things did not happen in any normal world. it was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim our single torch tempted no longer by the decadent and sinister sculptures that leered menacingly from the oppressive walls and which softened our progress to a cautious tiptoeing and crawling over the increasingly littered floor and heaps of debris. danforths eyes as well as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewise he who first noticed the queer aspect of the debris after we had passed many halfchoked arches leading to chambers and corridors on the ground level. it did not look quite as it ought after countless thousands of years of desertion, and when we cautiously turned on more light we saw that a kind of swath seemed to have been lately tracked through it. the irregular nature of the litter precluded any definite marks, but in the smoother places there were suggestions of the dragging of heavy objects. once we thought there was a hint of parallel tracks as if of runners. this was what made us pause again. it was during that pause that we caught simultaneously this time the other odor ahead. paradoxically, it was both a less frightful and more frightful odor less frightful intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place under the known circumstances unless, of course, gedney for the odor was the plain and familiar one of common petrol everyday gasoline. our motivation after that is something i will leave to psychologists. we knew now that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have crawled into this nighted burial place of the aeons, hence could not doubt any longer the existence of nameless conditions present or at least recent just ahead. yet in the end we did let sheer burning curiosityor anxietyor autohypnotism or vague thoughts of responsibility toward gedney or what not drive us on. danforth whispered again of the print he thought he had seen at the alley turning in the ruins above; and of the faint musical piping potentially of tremendous significance in the light of lakes dissection report, despite its close resemblance to the cavemouth echoes of the windy peaks which he thought he had shortly afterward half heard from unknown depths below. i, in my turn, whispered of how the camp was left of what had disappeared, and of how the madness of a lone survivor might have conceived the inconceivable a wild trip across the monstrous mountains and a descent into the unknown, primal masonry but we could not convince each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite. we had turned off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace of deeply filtered upper day kept the blackness from being absolute. having automatically begun to move ahead, we guided ourselves by occasional flashes from our torch. the disturbed debris formed an impression we could not shake off, and the smell of gasoline grew stronger. more and more ruin met our eyes and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw that the forward way was about to cease. we had been all too correct in our pessimistic guess about that rift glimpsed from the air. our tunnel quest was a blind one, and we were not even going to be able to reach the basement out of which the abyssward aperture opened. the torch, flashing over the grotesquely carved walls of the blocked corridor in which we stood, showed several doorways in various states of obstruction; and from one of them the gasoline odorquite submerging that other hint of odor came with especial distinctness. as we looked more steadily, we saw that beyond a doubt there had been a slight and recent clearing away of debris from that particular opening. whatever the lurking horror might be, we believed the direct avenue toward it was now plainly manifest. i do not think anyone will wonder that we waited an appreciable time before making any further motion. and yet, when we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression was one of anticlimax. for amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt a perfect cube with sides of about twenty feet there remained no recent object of instantly discernible size; so that we looked instinctively, though in vain, for a farther doorway. in another moment, however, danforths sharp vision had descried a place where the floor debris had been disturbed; and we turned on both torches full strength. though what we saw in that light was actually simple and trifling, i am none the less reluctant to tell of it because of what it implied. it was a rough leveling of the debris, upon which several small objects lay carelessly scattered, and at one corner of which a considerable amount of gasoline must have been spilled lately enough to leave a strong odor even at this extreme superplateau altitude. in other words, it could not be other than a sort of camp a camp made by questing beings who, like us, had been turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to the abyss. let me be plain. the scattered objects were, so far as substance was concerned, all from lakes camp; and consisted of tin cans as queerly opened as those we had seen at that ravaged place, many spent matches, three illustrated books more or less curiously smudged, an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and instructional carton, a broken fountain pen, some oddly snipped fragments of fur and tent cloth, a used electric battery with circular of directions, a folder that came with our type of tent heater, and a sprinkling of crumpled papers. it was all bad enough but when we smoothed out the papers and looked at what was on them, we felt we had come to the worst. we had found certain inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which might have prepared us, yet the effect of the sight down there in the prehuman vaults of a nightmare city was almost too much to bear. a mad gedney might have made the groups of dots in imitation of those found on the greenish soapstones, just as the dots on those insane fivepointed grave mounds might have been made; and he might conceivably have prepared rough, hasty sketches varying in their accuracy or lack of it which outlined the neighboring parts of the city and traced the way from a circularly represented place outside our previous route a place we identified as a great cylindrical tower in the carvings and as a vast circular gulf glimpsed in our aerial survey to the present fivepointed structure and the tunnel mouth therein. he might, i repeat, have prepared such sketches; for those before us were quite obviously compiled, as our own had been, from late sculptures somewhere in the glacial labyrinth, though not from the ones which we had seen and used. but what the artblind bungler could never have done was to execute those sketches in a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite haste and carelessness, to any of the decadent carvings from which they were taken the characteristic and unmistakable technique of the old ones themselves in the dead citys heyday. there are those who will say danforth and i were utterly mad not to flee for our lives after that; since our conclusions were now notwithstanding their wildness completely fixed, and of a nature i need not even mention to those who have read my account as far as this. perhaps we were mad for have i not said those horrible peaks were mountains of madness? but i think i can detect something of the same spirit albeit in a less extreme form in the men who stalk deadly beasts through african jungles to photograph them or study their habits. half paralyzed with terror though we were, there was nevertheless fanned within us a blazing flame of awe and curiosity which triumphed in the end. of course we did not mean to face that or those which we knew had been there, but we felt that they must be gone by now. they would by this time have found the other neighboring entrance to the abyss, and have passed within, to whatever nightblack fragments of the past might await them in the ultimate gulf the ultimate gulf they had never seen. or if that entrance, too, was blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking another. they were, we remembered, partly independent of light. looking back to that moment, i can scarcely recall just what precise form our new emotions took just what change of immediate objective it was that so sharpened our sense of expectancy. we certainly did not mean to face what we feared yet i will not deny that we may have had a lurking, unconscious wish to spy certain things from some hidden vantage point. probably we had not given up our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there was interposed a new goal in the form of that great circular place shown on the crumpled sketches we had found. we had at once recognized it as a monstrous cylindrical tower figuring in the very earliest carvings, but appearing only as a prodigious round aperture from above. something about the impressiveness of its rendering, even in these hasty diagrams, made us think that its subglacial levels must still form a feature of peculiar importance. perhaps it embodied architectural marvels as yet unencountered by us. it was certainly of incredible age according to the sculptures in which it figured being indeed among the first things built in the city. its carvings, if preserved, could not but be highly significant. moreover, it might form a good present link with the upper world a shorter route than the one we were so carefully blazing, and probably that by which those others had descended. at any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches which quite perfectly confirmed our own and start back over the indicated course to the circular place; the course which our nameless predecessors must have traversed twice before us. the other neighboring gate to the abyss would lie beyond that. i need not speak of our journey during which we continued to leave an economical trail of paper for it was precisely the same in kind as that by which we had reached the culdesac; except that it tended to adhere more closely to the ground level and even descend to basement corridors. every now and then we could trace certain disturbing marks in the debris or litter underfoot; and after we had passed outside the radius of the gasoline scent, we were again faintly conscious spasmodically of that more hideous and more persistent scent. after the way had branched from our former course, we sometimes gave the rays of our single torch a furtive sweep along the walls; noting in almost every case the wellnigh omnipresent sculptures, which indeed seem to have formed a main aesthetic outlet for the old ones. but the salient object of the place was the titanic stone ramp which, eluding the archways by a sharp turn outward into the open floor, wound spirally up the stupendous cylindrical wall like an inside counterpart of those once climbing outside the monstrous towers or ziggurats of antique babylon. only the rapidity of our flight, and the perspective which confounded the descent with the towers inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from the air, and thus caused us to seek another avenue to the subglacial level. pabodie might have been able to tell what sort of engineering held it in place, but danforth and i could merely admire and marvel. we could see mighty stone corbels and pillars here and there, but what we saw seemed inadequate to the function performed. the thing was excellently preserved up to the present top of the tower a highly remarkable circumstance in view of its exposure and its shelter had done much to protect the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the walls. as we stepped out into the awesome half daylight of this monstrous cylinder bottom fifty million years old, and without doubt the most primally ancient structure ever to meet our eyes we saw that the ramptraversed sides stretched dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet. this, we recalled from our aerial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some forty feet; since the yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been at the top of an approximately twentyfoot mound of crumbled masonry, somewhat sheltered for threefourths of its circumference by the massive curving walls of a line of higher ruins. according to the sculptures, the original tower had stood in the center of an immense circular plaza, and had been perhaps five hundred or six hundred feet high, with tiers of horizontal disks near the top, and a row of needlelike spires along the upper rim. most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than inward a fortunate happening, since otherwise the ramp might have been shattered and the whole interior choked. as it was, the ramp showed sad battering; whilst the choking was such that all the archways at the bottom seemed to have been recently cleared. it took us only a moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by which those others had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our own ascent despite the long trail of paper we had left elsewhere. the towers mouth was no farther from the foothills and our waiting plane than was the great terraced building we had entered, and any further subglacial exploration we might make on this trip would lie in this general region. oddly, we were still thinking about possible later trips even after all we had seen and guessed. then, as we picked our way cautiously over the debris of the great floor, there came a sight which for the time excluded all other matters. it was the neatly huddled array of three sledges in that farther angle of the ramps lower and outwardprojecting course which had hitherto been screened from our view. there they were the three sledges missing from lakes camp shaken by a hard usage which must have included forcible dragging along great reaches of snowless masonry and debris, as well as much hand portage over utterly unnavigable places. they were carefully and intelligently packed and strapped, and contained things memorably familiar enough: the gasoline stove, fuel cans, instrument cases, provision tins, tarpaulins obviously bulging with books, and some bulging with less obvious contents everything derived from lakes equipment. after what we had found in that other room, we were in a measure prepared for this encounter. the really great shock came when we stepped over and undid one tarpaulin whose outlines had peculiarly disquieted us. it seems that others as well as lake had been interested in collecting typical specimens; for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly preserved, patched with adhesive plaster where some wounds around the neck had occurred, and wrapped with care to prevent further damage. they were the bodies of young gedney and the missing dog. x many people will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about the northward tunnel and the abyss so soon after our somber discovery, and i am not prepared to say that we would have immediately revived such thoughts but for a specific circumstance which broke in upon us and set up a whole new train of speculations. we had replaced the tarpaulin over poor gedney and were standing in a kind of mute bewilderment when the sounds finally reached our consciousness the first sounds we had heard since descending out of the open where the mountain wind whined faintly from its unearthly heights. wellknown and mundane though they were, their presence in this remote world of death was more unexpected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tones could possibly have been since they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions of cosmic harmony. had it been some trace of that bizarre musical piping over a wide range which lakes dissection report had led us to expect in those others and which, indeed, our overwrought fancies had been reading into every wind howl we had heard since coming on the camp horror it would have had a kind of hellish congruity with the aeondead region around us. a voice from other epochs belongs in a graveyard of other epochs. as it was, however, the noise shattered all our profoundly seated adjustments all our tacit acceptance of the inner antarctic as a waste utterly and irrevocably void of every vestige of normal life. what we heard was not the fabulous note of any buried blasphemy of elder earth from whose supernal toughness an agedenied polar sun had evoked a monstrous response. instead, it was a thing so mockingly normal and so unerringly familiarized by our sea days off victoria land and our camp days at mcmurdo sound that we shuddered to think of it here, where such things ought not to be. to be brief it was simply the raucous squawking of a penguin. the muffled sound floated from subglacial recesses nearly opposite to the corridor whence we had come regions manifestly in the direction of that other tunnel to the vast abyss. the presence of a living water bird in such a direction in a world whose surface was one of agelong and uniform lifelessness could lead to only one conclusion; hence our first thought was to verify the objective reality of the sound. it was, indeed, repeated, and seemed at times to come from more than one throat. seeking its source, we entered an archway from which much debris had been cleared; resuming our trail blazing with an added paper supply taken with curious repugnance from one of the tarpaulin bundles on the sledges when we left daylight behind. as the glaciated floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discerned some curious, dragging tracks; and once danforth found a distinct print of a sort whose description would be only too superfluous. the course indicated by the penguin cries was precisely what our map and compass prescribed as an approach to the more northerly tunnel mouth, and we were glad to find that a bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement levels seemed open. the tunnel, according to the chart, ought to start from the basement of a large pyramidal structure which we seemed vaguely to recall from our aerial survey as remarkably wellpreserved. along our path the single torch showed a customary profusion of carvings, but we did not pause to examine any of these. suddenly a bulky white shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the second torch. it is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from earlier fears of what might lurk near. those other ones, having left their supplies in the great circular place, must have planned to return after their scouting trip toward or into the abyss; yet we had now discarded all caution concerning them as completely as if they had never existed. this white, waddling thing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to realize at once that it was not one of those others. they were larger and dark, and, according to the sculptures, their motion over land surfaces was a swift, assured matter despite the queerness of their seaborn tentacle equipment. but to say that the white thing did not profoundly frighten us would be vain. we were indeed clutched for an instant by primitive dread almost sharper than the worst of our reasoned fears regarding those others. then came a flash of anticlimax as the white shape sidled into a lateral archway to our left to join two others of its kind which had summoned it in raucous tones. for it was only a penguin albeit of a huge, unknown species larger than the greatest of the known king penguins, and monstrous in its combined albinism and virtual eyelessness. when we had followed the thing into the archway and turned both our torches on the indifferent and unheeding group of three, we saw that they were all eyeless albinos of the same unknown and gigantic species. their size reminded us of some of the archaic penguins depicted in the old ones sculptures, and it did not take us long to conclude that they were descended from the same stockundoubtedly surviving through a retreat to some warmer inner region whose perpetual blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied their eyes to mere useless slits. that their present habitat was the vast abyss we sought, was not for a moment to be doubted; and this evidence of the gulfs continued warmth and habitability filled us with the most curious and subtly perturbing fancies. we wondered, too, what had caused these three birds to venture out of their usual domain. the state and silence of the great dead city made it clear that it had at no time been an habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest indifference of the trio to our presence made it seem odd that any passing party of those others should have startled them. was it possible that those others had taken some aggressive action or tried to increase their meat supply? we doubted whether that pungent odor which the dogs had hated could cause an equal antipathy in these penguins, since their ancestors had obviously lived on excellent terms with the old ones an amicable relationship which must have survived in the abyss below as long as any of the old ones remained. regretting in a flareup of the old spirit of pure science that we could not photograph these anomalous creatures, we shortly left them to their squawking and pushed on toward the abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to us, and whose exact direction occasional penguin tracks made clear. not long afterward a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarly sculptureless corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the tunnel mouth at last. we had passed two more penguins, and heard others immediately ahead. then the corridor ended in a prodigious open space which made us gasp involuntarily a perfect inverted hemisphere, obviously deep underground; fully a hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, with low archways opening around all parts of the circumference but one, and that one yawning cavernously with a black, arched aperture which broke the symmetry of the vault to a height of nearly fifteen feet. it was the entrance to the great abyss. in this vast hemisphere, whose concave roof was impressively though decadently carved to a likeness of the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins waddled aliens there, but indifferent and unseeing. the black tunnel yawned indefinitely off at a steep, descending grade, its aperture adorned with grotesquely chiseled jambs and lintel. from that cryptical mouth we fancied a current of slightly warmer air, and perhaps even a suspicion of vapor proceeded; and we wondered what living entities other than penguins the limitless void below, and the contiguous honeycombings of the land and the titan mountains, might conceal. we wondered, too, whether the trace of mountaintop smoke at first suspected by poor lake, as well as the odd haze we had ourselves perceived around the rampartcrowned peak, might not be caused by the tortuouschanneled rising of some such vapor from the unfathomed regions of earths core. entering the tunnel, we saw that its outline was at least at the start about fifteen feet each way sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the usual megalithic masonry. the sides were sparsely decorated with cartouches of conventional designs in a late, decadent style; and all the construction and carving were marvelously wellpreserved. the floor was quite clear, except for a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin tracks and the inward tracks of these others. the farther one advanced, the warmer it became; so that we were soon unbuttoning our heavy garments. we wondered whether there were any actually igneous manifestations below, and whether the waters of that sunless sea were hot. alter a short distance the masonry gave place to solid rock, though the tunnel kept the same proportions and presented the same aspect of carved regularity. occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves were cut in the floor. several times we noted the mouths of small lateral galleries not recorded in our diagrams; none of them such as to complicate the problem of our return, and all of them welcome as possible refuges in case we met unwelcome entities on their way back from the abyss. the nameless scent of such things was very distinct. doubtless it was suicidally foolish to venture into that tunnel under the known conditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is stronger in certain persons than most suspect indeed, it was just such a lure which had brought us to this unearthly polar waste in the first place. we saw several penguins as we passed along, and speculated on the distance we would have to traverse. the carvings had led us to expect a steep downhill walk of about a mile to the abyss, but our previous wanderings had shown us that matters of scale were not wholly to be depended on. alter about a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated, and we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we passed. there was no visible vapor as at the mouth, but this was doubtless due to the lack of contrasting cooler air. the temperature was rapidly ascending, and we were not surprised to come upon a careless heap of material shudderingly familiar to us. it was composed of furs and tent cloth taken from lakes camp, and we did not pause to study the bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed. slightly beyond this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number of the side galleries, and concluded that the densely honeycombed region beneath the higher foothills must now have been reached. the nameless scent was now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensive odor of what nature we could not guess, though we thought of decaying organisms and perhaps unknown subterranean fungi. then came a startling expansion of the tunnel for which the carvings had not prepared us a broadening and rising into a lofty, naturallooking elliptical cavern with a level floor, some seventyfive feet long and fifty broad, and with many immense side passages leading away into cryptical darkness. though this cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torches suggested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of several walls between adjacent honeycombings. the walls were rough, and the high, vaulted roof was thick with stalactites; but the solid rock floor had been smoothed off, and was free from all debris, detritus, or even dust to a positively abnormal extent. except for the avenue through which we had come, this was true of the floors of all the great galleries opening off from it; and the singularity of the condition was such as to set us vainly puzzling. the curious new fetor which had supplemented the nameless scent was excessively pungent here; so much so that it destroyed all trace of the other. something about this whole place, with its polished and almost glistening floor, struck us as more vaguely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we had previously encountered. the regularity of the passage immediately ahead, as well as the larger proportion of penguindroppings there, prevented all confusion as to the right course amidst this plethora of equally great cave mouths. nevertheless we resolved to resume our paper trailblazing if any further complexity should develop; for dust tracks, of course, could no longer be expected. upon resuming our direct progress we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel walls and stopped short in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come over the carvings in this part of the passage. we realized, of course, the great decadence of the old ones sculpture at the time of the tunneling, and had indeed noticed the inferior workmanship of the arabesques in the stretches behind us. but now, in this deeper section beyond the cavern, there was a sudden difference wholly transcending explanation a difference in basic nature as well as in mere quality, and involving so profound and calamitous a degradation of skill that nothing in the hitherto observed rate of decline could have led one to expect it. this new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in delicacy of detail. it was countersunk with exaggerated depth in bands following the same general line as the sparse cartouches of the earlier sections, but the height of the reliefs did not reach the level of the general surface. danforth had the idea that it was a second carving a sort of palimpsest formed after the obliteration of a previous design. in nature it was wholly decorative and conventional, and consisted of crude spirals and angles roughly following the quintile mathematical tradition of the old ones, yet seemingly more like a parody than a perpetuation of that tradition. we could not get it out of our minds that some subtly but profoundly alien element had been added to the aesthetic feeling behind the technique an alien element, danforth guessed, that was responsible for the laborious substitution. it was like, yet disturbingly unlike, what we had come to recognize as the old ones art; and i was persistently reminded of such hybrid things as the ungainly palmyrene sculptures fashioned in the roman manner. that others had recently noticed this belt of carving was hinted by the presence of a used flashlight battery on the floor in front of one of the most characteristic cartouches. since we could not afford to spend any considerable time in study, we resumed our advance after a cursory look; though frequently casting beams over the walls to see if any further decorative changes developed. nothing of the sort was perceived, though the carvings were in places rather sparse because of the numerous mouths of smoothfloored lateral tunnels. we saw and heard fewer penguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an infinitely distant chorus of them somewhere deep within the earth. the new and inexplicable odor was abominably strong, and we could detect scarcely a sign of that other nameless scent. puffs of visible vapor ahead bespoke increasing contrasts in temperature, and the relative nearness of the sunless sea cliffs of the great abyss. then, quite unexpectedly, we saw certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead obstructions which were quite definitely not penguins and turned on our second torch after making sure that the objects were quite stationary. xi still another time have i come to a place where it is very difficult to proceed. i ought to be hardened by this stage; but there are some experiences and intimations which scar too deeply to permit of healing, and leave only such an added sensitiveness that memory reinspires all the original horror. we saw, as i have said, certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead; and i may add that our nostrils were assailed almost simultaneously by a very curious intensification of the strange prevailing fetor, now quite plainly mixed with the nameless stench of those others which had gone before. the light of the second torch left no doubt of what the obstructions were, and we dared approach them only because we could see, even from a distance, that they were quite as past all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed from the monstrous starmounded graves at poor lakes camp. they were, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had unearthed though it grew plain from the thick, dark green pool gathering around them that their incompleteness was of infinitely greater recency. there seemed to be only four of them, whereas lakes bulletins would have suggested no less than eight as forming the group which had preceded us. to find them in this state was wholly unexpected, and we wondered what sort of monstrous struggle had occurred down here in the dark. penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks, and our ears now made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond. had those others disturbed such a place and aroused murderous pursuit? the obstructions did not suggest it, for penguins beaks against the tough tissues lake had dissected could hardly account for the terrible damage our approaching glance was beginning to make out. besides, the huge blind birds we had seen appeared to be singularly peaceful. had there, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent four responsible? if so, where were they? were they close at hand and likely to form an immediate menace to us? we glanced anxiously at some of the smoothfloored lateral passages as we continued our slow and frankly reluctant approach. whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been that which had frightened the penguins into their unaccustomed wandering. it must, then, have arisen near that faintly heard rookery in the incalculable gulf beyond, since there were no signs that any birds had normally dwelt here. perhaps, we reflected, there had been a hideous running fight, with the weaker party seeking to get back to the cached sledges when their pursuers finished them. one could picture the demoniac fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it surged out of the black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and scurrying ahead. i say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete obstructions slowly and reluctantly. would to heaven we had never approached them at all, but had run back at top speed out of that blasphemous tunnel with the greasily smooth floors and the degenerate murals aping and mocking the things they had supersededrun back, before we had seen what we did see, and before our minds were burned with something which will never let us breathe easily again! both of our torches were turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon realized the dominant factor in their incompleteness. mauled, compressed, twisted, and ruptured as they were, their chief common injury was total decapitation. from each one the tentacled starfish head had been removed; and as we drew near we saw that the manner of removal looked more like some hellish tearing or suction than like any ordinary form of cleavage. their noisome darkgreen ichor formed a large, spreading pool; but its stench was half overshadowed by the newer and stranger stench, here more pungent than at any other point along our route. only when we had come very close to the sprawling obstructions could we trace that second, unexplainable fetor to any immediate source and the instant we did so danforth, remembering certain very vivid sculptures of the old ones history in the permian age one hundred and fifty million years ago, gave vent to a nervetortured cry which echoed hysterically through that vaulted and archaic passage with the evil, palimpsest carvings. i came only just short of echoing his cry myself; for i had seen those primal sculptures, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had suggested that hideous slime coating found on certain incomplete and prostrate old ones those whom the frightful shoggoths had characteristically slain and sucked to a ghastly headlessness in the great war of resubjugation. they were infamous, nightmare sculptures even when telling of ageold, bygone things; for shoggoths and their work ought not to be seen by human beings or portrayed by any beings. the mad author of the necronomicon had nervously tried to swear that none had been bred on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had even conceived them. formless protoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and organs and processes viscous agglutinations of bubbling cells rubbery fifteenfoot spheroids infinitely plastic and ductile slaves of suggestion, builders of cities more and more sullen, more and more intelligent, more and more amphibious, more and more imitative! great god! what madness made even those blasphemous old ones willing to use and carve such things? and now, when danforth and i saw the freshly glistening and reflectively iridescent black slime which clung thickly to those headless bodies and stank obscenely with that new, unknown odor whose cause only a diseased fancy could envisage clung to those bodies and sparkled less voluminously on a smooth part of the accursedly resculptured wall in a series of grouped dots we understood the quality of cosmic fear to its uttermost depths. it was not fear of those four missing others for all too well did we suspect they would do no harm again. poor devils! after all, they were not evil things of their kind. they were the men of another age and another order of being. nature had played a hellish jest on them as it will on any others that human madness, callousness, or cruelty may hereafter dig up in that hideously dead or sleeping polar waste and this was their tragic homecoming. they had not been even savagesfor what indeed had they done? that awful awakening in the cold of an unknown epoch perhaps an attack by the furry, frantically barking quadrupeds, and a dazed defense against them and the equally frantic white simians with the queer wrappings and paraphernalia ... poor lake, poor gedney... and poor old ones! scientists to the last what had they done that we would not have done in their place? god, what intelligence and persistence! what a facing of the incredible, just as those carven kinsmen and forbears had faced things only a little less incredible! radiates, vegetables, monstrosities, star spawn whatever they had been, they were men! they had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once worshipped and roamed among the tree ferns. they had found their dead city brooding under its curse, and had read its carven latter days as we had done. they had tried to reach their living fellows in fabled depths of blackness they had never seen and what had they found? all this flashed in unison through the thoughts of danforth and me as we looked from those headless, slimecoated shapes to the loathsome palimpsest sculptures and the diabolical dot groups of fresh slime on the wall beside them looked and understood what must have triumphed and survived down there in the cyclopean water city of that nighted, penguinfringed abyss, whence even now a sinister curling mist had begun to belch pallidly as if in answer to danforths hysterical scream. the shock of recognizing that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen us into mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversations that we have learned of the complete identity of our thoughts at that moment. it seemed aeons that we stood there, but actually it could not have been more than ten or fifteen seconds. that hateful, pallid mist curled forward as if veritably driven by some remoter advancing bulkand then came a sound which upset much of what we had just decided, and in so doing broke the spell and enabled us to run like mad past squawking, confused penguins over our former trail back to the city, along icesunken megalithic corridors to the great open circle, and up that archaic spiral ramp in a frenzied, automatic plunge for the sane outer air and light of day. the new sound, as i have intimated, upset much that we had decided; because it was what poor lakes dissection had led us to attribute to those we had judged dead. it was, danforth later told me, precisely what he had caught in infinitely muffled form when at that spot beyond the alley corner above the glacial level; and it certainly had a shocking resemblance to the wind pipings we had both heard around the lofty mountain caves. at the risk of seeming puerile i will add another thing, too, if only because of the surprising way danforths impressions chimed with mine. of course common reading is what prepared us both to make the interpretation, though danforth has hinted at queer notions about unsuspected and forbidden sources to which poe may have had access when writing his arthur gordon pym a century ago. it will be remembered that in that fantastic tale there is a word of unknown but terrible and prodigious significance connected with the antarctic and screamed eternally by the gigantic spectrally snowy birds of that malign regions core. tekelili! tekelili! that, i may admit, is exactly what we thought we heard conveyed by that sudden sound behind the advancing white mistthat insidious musical piping over a singularly wide range. we were in full flight before three notes or syllables had been uttered, though we knew that the swiftness of the old ones would enable any screamroused and pursuing survivor of the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really wished to do so. we had a vague hope, however, that nonaggressive conduct and a display of kindred reason might cause such a being to spare us in case of capture, if only from scientific curiosity. after all, if such an one had nothing to fear for itself, it would have no motive in harming us. concealment being futile at this juncture, we used our torch for a running glance behind, and perceived that the mist was thinning. would we see, at last, a complete and living specimen of those others? again came that insidious musical piping tekelili! tekelili! then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it occurred to us that the entity might be wounded. we could take no chances, however, since it was very obviously approaching in answer to danforths scream, rather than in flight from any other entity. the timing was too close to admit of doubt. of the whereabouts of that less conceivable and less mentionable nightmare that fetid, unglimpsed mountain of slimespewing protoplasm whose race had conquered the abyss and sent land pioneers to recarve and squirm through the burrows of the hills we could form no guess; and it cost us a genuine pang to leave this probably crippled old oneperhaps a lone survivor to the peril of recapture and a nameless fate. thank heaven we did not slacken our run. the curling mist had thickened again, and was driving ahead with increased speed; whilst the straying penguins in our rear were squawking and screaming and displaying signs of a panic really surprising in view of their relatively minor confusion when we had passed them. once more came that sinister, wideranged piping tekelili! tekelili! we had been wrong. the thing was not wounded, but had merely paused on encountering the bodies of its fallen kindred and the hellish slime inscription above them. we could never know what that demon message was but those burials at lakes camp had shown how much importance the beings attached to their dead. our recklessly used torch now revealed ahead of us the large open cavern where various ways converged, and we were glad to be leaving those morbid palimpsest sculptures almost felt even when scarcely seenbehind. another thought which the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility of losing our pursuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries. there were several of the blind albino penguins in the open space, and it seemed clear that their fear of the oncoming entity was extreme to the point of unaccountability. if at that point we dimmed our torch to the very lowest limit of traveling need, keeping it strictly in front of us, the frightened squawking motions of the huge birds in the mist might muffle our footfalls, screen our true course, and somehow set up a false lead. amidst the churning, spiraling fog, the littered and unglistening floor of the main tunnel beyond this point, as differing from the other morbidly polished burrows, could hardly form a highly distinguishing feature; even, so far as we could conjecture, for those indicated special senses which made the old ones partly, though imperfectly, independent of light in emergencies. in fact, we were somewhat apprehensive lest we go astray ourselves in our haste. for we had, of course, decided to keep straight on toward the dead city; since the consequences of loss in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be unthinkable. the fact that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing did take a wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one. the penguins alone could not have saved us, but in conjunction with the mist they seem to have done so. only a benign fate kept the curling vapors thick enough at the right moment, for they were constantly shifting and threatening to vanish. indeed, they did lift for a second just before we emerged from the nauseously resculptured tunnel into the cave; so that we actually caught one first and only half glimpse of the oncoming entity as we cast a final, desperately fearful glance backward before dimming the torch and mixing with the penguins in the hope of dodging pursuit. if the fate which screened us was benign, that which gave us the half glimpse was infinitely the opposite; for to that flash of semivision can be traced a full half of the horror which has ever since haunted us. our exact motive in looking back again was perhaps no more than the immemorial instinct of the pursued to gauge the nature and course of its pursuer; or perhaps it was an automatic attempt to answer a subconscious question raised by one of our senses. in the midst of our flight, with all our faculties centered on the problem of escape, we were in no condition to observe and analyze details; yet even so, our latent brain cells must have wondered at the message brought them by our nostrils. afterward we realized what it wasthat our retreat from the fetid slime coating on those headless obstructions, and the coincident approach of the pursuing entity, had not brought us the exchange of stenches which logic called for. in the neighborhood of the prostrate things that new and lately unexplainable fetor had been wholly dominant; but by this time it ought to have largely given place to the nameless stench associated with those others. this it had not done for instead, the newer and less bearable smell was now virtually undiluted, and growing more and more poisonously insistent each second. so we glanced back simultaneously, it would appear; though no doubt the incipient motion of one prompted the imitation of the other. as we did so we flashed both torches full strength at the momentarily thinned mist; either from sheer primitive anxiety to see all we could, or in a less primitive but equally unconscious effort to dazzle the entity before we dimmed our light and dodged among the penguins of the labyrinth center ahead. unhappy act! not orpheus himself, or lots wife, paid much more dearly for a backward glance. and again came that shocking, wideranged piping tekelili! tekelili! i might as well be frank even if i cannot bear to be quite direct in stating what we saw; though at the time we felt that it was not to be admitted even to each other. the words reaching the reader can never even suggest the awfulness of the sight itself. it crippled our consciousness so completely that i wonder we had the residual sense to dim our torches as planned, and to strike the right tunnel toward the dead city. instinct alone must have carried us through perhaps better than reason could have done; though if that was what saved us, we paid a high price. of reason we certainly had little enough left. danforth was totally unstrung, and the first thing i remember of the rest of the journey was hearing him lightheadedly chant an hysterical formula in which i alone of mankind could have found anything but insane irrelevance. it reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of the penguins; reverberated through the vaultings ahead, andthank godthrough the now empty vaultings behind. he could not have begun it at once else we would not have been alive and blindly racing. i shudder to think of what a shade of difference in his nervous reactions might have brought. south station under washington under park street underkendall central harvard the poor fellow was chanting the familiar stations of the bostoncambridge tunnel that burrowed through our peaceful native soil thousands of miles away in new england, yet to me the ritual had neither irrelevance nor home feeling. it had only horror, because i knew unerringly the monstrous, nefandous analogy that had suggested it. we had expected, upon looking back, to see a terrible and incredible moving entity if the mists were thin enough; but of that entity we had formed a clear idea. what we did see for the mists were indeed all too maliguly thinned was something altogether different, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable. it was the utter, objective embodiment of the fantastic novelists thing that should not be; and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrushing subway train as one sees it from a station platform the great black front looming colossally out of infinite subterranean distance, constellated with strangely colored lights and filling the prodigious burrow as a piston fills a cylinder. but we were not on a station platform. we were on the track ahead as the nightmare, plastic column of fetid black iridescence oozed tightly onward through its fifteenfoot sinus, gathering unholy speed and driving before it a spiral, rethickening cloud of the pallid abyss vapor. it was a terrible, indescribable thing vaster than any subway train a shapeless congeries of protoplasmic bubbles, faintly selfluminous, and with myriads of temporary eyes forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over the tunnelfilling front that bore down upon us, crushing the frantic penguins and slithering over the glistening floor that it and its kind had swept so evilly free of all litter. still came that eldritch, mocking cry tekelili! tekelili! and at last we remembered that the demoniac shoggoths given life, thought, and plastic organ patterns solely by the old ones, and having no language save that which the dot groups expressed had likewise no voice save the imitated accents of their bygone masters. xii danforth and i have recollections of emerging into the great sculptured hemisphere and of threading our back trail through the cyclopean rooms and corridors of the dead city; yet these are purely dream fragments involving no memory of volition, details, or physical exertion. it was as if we floated in a nebulous world or dimension without time, causation, or orientation. the gray halfdaylight of the vast circular space sobered us somewhat; but we did not go near those cached sledges or look again at poor gedney and the dog. they have a strange and titanic mausoleum, and i hope the end of this planet will find them still undisturbed. it was while struggling up the colossal spiral incline that we first felt the terrible fatigue and short breath which our race through the thin plateau air had produced; but not even fear of collapse could make us pause before reaching the normal outer realm of sun and sky. there was something vaguely appropriate about our departure from those buried epochs; for as we wound our panting way up the sixtyfoot cylinder of primal masonry, we glimpsed beside us a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead races early and undecayed technique a farewell from the old ones, written fifty million years ago. finally scrambling out at the top, we found ourselves on a great mound of tumbled blocks, with the curved walls of higher stonework rising westward, and the brooding peaks of the great mountains showing beyond the more crumbled structures toward the east. the low antarctic sun of midnight peered redly from the southern horizon through rifts in the jagged ruins, and the terrible age and deadness of the nightmare city seemed all the starker by contrast with such relatively known and accustomed things as the features of the polar landscape. the sky above was a churning and opalescent mass of tenuous icevapors, and the cold clutched at our vitals. wearily resting the outfitbags to which we had instinctively clung throughout our desperate flight, we rebuttoned our heavy garments for the stumbling climb down the mound and the walk through the aeonold stone maze to the foothills where our aeroplane waited. of what had set us fleeing from that darkness of earths secret and archaic gulfs we said nothing at all. in less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep grade to the foothillsthe probable ancient terrace by which we had descended, and could see the dark bulk of our great plane amidst the sparse ruins on the rising slope ahead. halfway uphill toward our goal we paused for a momentary breathing spell, and turned to look again at the fantastic tangle of incredible stone shapes below usonce more outlined mystically against an unknown west. as we did so we saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning haziness; the restless icevapors having moved up to the zenith, where their mocking outlines seemed on the point of settling into some bizarre pattern which they feared to make quite definite or conclusive. there now lay revealed on the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque city a dim, elfin line of pinnacled violet whose needlepointed heights loomed dreamlike against the beckoning rose color of the western sky. up toward this shimmering rim sloped the ancient tableland, the depressed course of the bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon of shadow. for a second we gasped in admiration of the scenes unearthly cosmic beauty, and then vague horror began to creep into our souls. for this far violet line could be nothing else than the terrible mountains of the forbidden land highest of earths peaks and focus of earths evil; harborers of nameless horrors and archaean secrets; shunned and prayed to by those who feared to carve their meaning; untrodden by any living thing on earth, but visited by the sinister lightnings and sending strange beams across the plains in the polar night beyond doubt the unknown archetype of that dreaded kadath in the cold waste beyond abhorrent leng, whereof primal legends hint evasively. if the sculptured maps and pictures in that prehuman city had told truly, these cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than three hundred miles away; yet none the less sharply did their dim elfin essence appear above that remote and snowy rim, like the serrated edge of a monstrous alien planet about to rise into unaccustomed heavens. their height, then, must have been tremendous beyond all comparison carrying them up into tenuous atmospheric strata peopled only by such gaseous wraiths as rash flyers have barely lived to whisper of after unexplainable falls. looking at them, i thought nervously of certain sculptured hints of what the great bygone river had washed down into the city from their accursed slopes and wondered how much sense and how much folly had lain in the fears of those old ones who carved them so reticently. i recalled how their northerly end must come near the coast at queen mary land, where even at that moment sir douglas mawsons expedition was doubtless working less than a thousand miles away; and hoped that no evil fate would give sir douglas and his men a glimpse of what might lie beyond the protecting coastal range. such thoughts formed a measure of my overwrought condition at the time and danforth seemed to be even worse. yet long before we had passed the great starshaped ruin and reached our plane, our fears had become transferred to the lesser but vastenough range whose recrossing lay ahead of us. from these foothills the black, ruincrusted slopes reared up starkly and hideously against the east, again reminding us of those strange asian paintings of nicholas roerich; and when we thought of the frightful amorphous entities that might have pushed their fetidly squirming way even to the topmost hollow pinnacles, we could not face without panic the prospect of again sailing by those suggestive skyward cave mouths where the wind made sounds like an evil musical piping over a wide range. to make matters worse, we saw distinct traces of local mist around several of the summitsas poor lake must have done when he made that early mistake about volcanism and thought shiveringly of that kindred mist from which we had just escaped; of that, and of the blasphemous, horrorfostering abyss whence all such vapors came. all was well with the plane, and we clumsily hauled on our heavy flying furs. danforth got the engine started without trouble, and we made a very smooth takeoff over the nightmare city. below us the primal cyclopean masonry spread out as it had done when first we saw it, and we began rising and turning to test the wind for our crossing through the pass. at a very high level there must have been great disturbance, since the icedust clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantastic things; but at twentyfour thousand feet, the height we needed for the pass, we found navigation quite practicable. as we drew close to the jutting peaks the winds strange piping again became manifest, and i could see danforths hands trembling at the controls. rank amateur that i was, i thought at that moment that i might be a better navigator than he in effecting the dangerous crossing between pinnacles; and when i made motions to change seats and take over his duties he did not protest. i tried to keep all my skill and selfpossession about me, and stared at the sector of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the passresolutely refusing to pay attention to the puffs of mountaintop vapor, and wishing that i had waxstopped ears like ulysses men off the sirens coast to keep that disturbing windpiping from my consciousness. but danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a dangerous nervous pitch, could not keep quiet. i felt him turning and wriggling about as he looked back at the terrible receding city, ahead at the caveriddled, cubebarnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleak sea of snowy, rampartstrewn foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely clouded sky. it was then, just as i was trying to steer safely through the pass, that his mad shrieking brought us so close to disaster by shattering my tight hold on myself and causing me to fumble helplessly with the controls for a moment. a second afterward my resolution triumphed and we made the crossing safely yet i am afraid that danforth will never be the same again. i have said that danforth refused to tell me what final horror made him scream out so insanelya horror which, i feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present breakdown. we had snatches of shouted conversation above the winds piping and the engines buzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and swooped slowly down toward the camp, but that had mostly to do with the pledges of secrecy we had made as we prepared to leave the nightmare city. certain things, we had agreed, were not for people to know and discuss lightlyand i would not speak of them now but for the need of heading off that starkweathermoore expedition, and others, at any cost. it is absolutely necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, that some of earths dark, dead corners and unplumbed depths be let alone; lest sleeping abnormalities wake to resurgent life, and blasphemously surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of their black lairs to newer and wider conquests. all that danforth has ever hinted is that the final horror was a mirage. it was not, he declares, anything connected with the cubes and caves of those echoing, vaporous, wormilyhoneycombed mountains of madness which we crossed; but a single fantastic, demoniac glimpse, among the churning zenith clouds, of what lay back of those other violet westward mountains which the old ones had shunned and feared. it is very probable that the thing was a sheer delusion born of the previous stresses we had passed through, and of the actual though unrecognized mirage of the dead transmontane city experienced near lakes camp the day before; but it was so real to danforth that he suffers from it still. he has on rare occasions whispered disjointed and irresponsible things about the black pit, the carven rim, the protoshoggoths, the windowless solids with five dimensions, the nameless cylinder, the elder pharos, yogsothoth, the primal white jelly, the color out of space, the wings, the eyes in darkness, the moonladder, the original, the eternal, the undying, and other bizarre conceptions; but when he is fully himself he repudiates all this and attributes it to his curious and macabre reading of earlier years. danforth, indeed, is known to be among the few who have ever dared go completely through that wormriddled copy of the necronomicon kept under lock and key in the college library. the higher sky, as we crossed the range, was surely vaporous and disturbed enough; and although i did not see the zenith, i can well imagine that its swirls of ice dust may have taken strange forms. imagination, knowing how vividly distant scenes can sometimes be reflected, refracted, and magnified by such layers of restless cloud, might easily have supplied the rest and, of course, danforth did not hint any of these specific horrors till after his memory had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading. he could never have seen so much in one instantaneous glance. at the time, his shrieks were confined to the repetition of a single, mad word of all too obvious source: tekelili! tekelili! unhappy is he to whom the memories of childhood bring only fear and sadness. wretched is he who looks back upon lone hours in vast and dismal chambers with brown hangings and maddening rows of antique books, or upon awed watches in twilight groves of grotesque, gigantic, and vineencumbered trees that silently wave twisted branches far aloft. such a lot the gods gave to me to me, the dazed, the disappointed; the barren, the broken. and yet i am strangely content and cling desperately to those sere memories, when my mind momentarily threatens to reach beyond to the other. i know not where i was born, save that the castle was infinitely old and infinitely horrible, full of dark passages and having high ceilings where the eye could find only cobwebs and shadows. the stones in the crumbling corridors seemed always hideously damp, and there was an accursed smell everywhere, as of the piledup corpses of dead generations. it was never light, so that i used sometimes to light candles and gaze steadily at them for relief, nor was there any sun outdoors, since the terrible trees grew high above the topmost accessible tower. there was one black tower which reached above the trees into the unknown outer sky, but that was partly ruined and could not be ascended save by a wellnigh impossible climb up the sheer wall, stone by stone. i must have lived years in this place, but i cannot measure the time. beings must have cared for my needs, yet i cannot recall any person except myself, or anything alive but the noiseless rats and bats and spiders. i think that whoever nursed me must have been shockingly aged, since my first conception of a living person was that of somebody mockingly like myself, yet distorted, shrivelled, and decaying like the castle. to me there was nothing grotesque in the bones and skeletons that strewed some of the stone crypts deep down among the foundations. i fantastically associated these things with everyday events, and thought them more natural than the coloured pictures of living beings which i found in many of the mouldy books. from such books i learned all that i know. no teacher urged or guided me, and i do not recall hearing any human voice in all those years not even my own; for although i had read of speech, i had never thought to try to speak aloud. my aspect was a matter equally unthought of, for there were no mirrors in the castle, and i merely regarded myself by instinct as akin to the youthful figures i saw drawn and painted in the books. i felt conscious of youth because i remembered so little. outside, across the putrid moat and under the dark mute trees, i would often lie and dream for hours about what i read in the books; and would longingly picture myself amidst gay crowds in the sunny world beyond the endless forests. once i tried to escape from the forest, but as i went farther from the castle the shade grew denser and the air more filled with brooding fear; so that i ran frantically back lest i lose my way in a labyrinth of nighted silence. so through endless twilights i dreamed and waited, though i knew not what i waited for. then in the shadowy solitude my longing for light grew so frantic that i could rest no more, and i lifted entreating hands to the single black ruined tower that reached above the forest into the unknown outer sky. and at last i resolved to scale that tower, fall though i might; since it were better to glimpse the sky and perish, than to live without ever beholding day. in the dank twilight i climbed the worn and aged stone stairs till i reached the level where they ceased, and thereafter clung perilously to small footholds leading upward. ghastly and terrible was that dead, stairless cylinder of rock; black, ruined, and deserted, and sinister with startled bats whose wings made no noise. but more ghastly and terrible still was the slowness of my progress; for climb as i might, the darkness overhead grew no thinner, and a new chill as of haunted and venerable mould assailed me. i shivered as i wondered why i did not reach the light, and would have looked down had i dared. i fancied that night had come suddenly upon me, and vainly groped with one free hand for a window embrasure, that i might peer out and above, and try to judge the height i had once attained. all at once, after an infinity of awesome, sightless, crawling up that concave and desperate precipice, i felt my head touch a solid thing, and i knew i must have gained the roof, or at least some kind of floor. in the darkness i raised my free hand and tested the barrier, finding it stone and immovable. then came a deadly circuit of the tower, clinging to whatever holds the slimy wall could give; till finally my testing hand found the barrier yielding, and i turned upward again, pushing the slab or door with my head as i used both hands in my fearful ascent. there was no light revealed above, and as my hands went higher i knew that my climb was for the nonce ended; since the slab was the trapdoor of an aperture leading to a level stone surface of greater circumference than the lower tower, no doubt the floor of some lofty and capacious observation chamber. i crawled through carefully, and tried to prevent the heavy slab from falling back into place, but failed in the latter attempt. as i lay exhausted on the stone floor i heard the eerie echoes of its fall, hoped when necessary to pry it up again. believing i was now at prodigious height, far above the accursed branches of the wood, i dragged myself up from the floor and fumbled about for windows, that i might look for the first time upon the sky, and the moon and stars of which i had read. but on every hand i was disappointed; since all that i found were vast shelves of marble, bearing odious oblong boxes of disturbing size. more and more i reflected, and wondered what hoary secrets might abide in this high apartment so many aeons cut off from the castle below. then unexpectedly my hands came upon a doorway, where hung a portal of stone, rough with strange chiselling. trying it, i found it locked; but with a supreme burst of strength i overcame all obstacles and dragged it open inward. as i did so there came to me the purest ecstasy i have ever known; for shining tranquilly through an ornate grating of iron, and down a short stone passageway of steps that ascended from the newly found doorway, was the radiant full moon, which i had never before seen save in dreams and in vague visions i dared not call memories. fancying now that i had attained the very pinnacle of the castle, i commenced to rush up the few steps beyond the door; but the sudden veiling of the moon by a cloud caused me to stumble, and i felt my way more slowly in the dark. it was still very dark when i reached the grating which i tried carefully and found unlocked, but which i did not open for fear of falling from the amazing height to which i had climbed. then the moon came out. most demoniacal of all shocks is that of the abysmally unexpected and grotesquely unbelievable. nothing i had before undergone could compare in terror with what i now saw; with the bizarre marvels that sight implied. the sight itself was as simple as it was stupefying, for it was merely this: instead of a dizzying prospect of treetops seen from a lofty eminence, there stretched around me on the level through the grating nothing less than the solid ground, decked and diversified by marble slabs and columns, and overshadowed by an ancient stone church, whose ruined spire gleamed spectrally in the moonlight. half unconscious, i opened the grating and staggered out upon the white gravel path that stretched away in two directions. my mind, stunned and chaotic as it was, still held the frantic craving for light; and not even the fantastic wonder which had happened could stay my course. i neither knew nor cared whether my experience was insanity, dreaming, or magic; but was determined to gaze on brilliance and gaiety at any cost. i knew not who i was or what i was, or what my surroundings might be; though as i continued to stumble along i became conscious of a kind of fearsome latent memory that made my progress not wholly fortuitous. i passed under an arch out of that region of slabs and columns, and wandered through the open country; sometimes following the visible road, but sometimes leaving it curiously to tread across meadows where only occasional ruins bespoke the ancient presence of a forgotten road. once i swam across a swift river where crumbling, mossy masonry told of a bridge long vanished. over two hours must have passed before i reached what seemed to be my goal, a venerable ivied castle in a thickly wooded park, maddeningly familiar, yet full of perplexing strangeness to me. i saw that the moat was filled in, and that some of the wellknown towers were demolished, whilst new wings existed to confuse the beholder. but what i observed with chief interest and delight were the open windows gorgeously ablaze with light and sending forth sound of the gayest revelry. advancing to one of these i looked in and saw an oddly dressed company indeed; making merry, and speaking brightly to one another. i had never, seemingly, heard human speech before and could guess only vaguely what was said. some of the faces seemed to hold expressions that brought up incredibly remote recollections, others were utterly alien. i now stepped through the low window into the brilliantly lighted room, stepping as i did so from my single bright moment of hope to my blackest convulsion of despair and realization. the nightmare was quick to come, for as i entered, there occurred immediately one of the most terrifying demonstrations i had ever conceived. scarcely had i crossed the sill when there descended upon the whole company a sudden and unheralded fear of hideous intensity, distorting every face and evoking the most horrible screams from nearly every throat. flight was universal, and in the clamour and panic several fell in a swoon and were dragged away by their madly fleeing companions. many covered their eyes with their hands, and plunged blindly and awkwardly in their race to escape, overturning furniture and stumbling against the walls before they managed to reach one of the many doors. the cries were shocking; and as i stood in the brilliant apartment alone and dazed, listening to their vanishing echoes, i trembled at the thought of what might be lurking near me unseen. at a casual inspection the room seemed deserted, but when i moved towards one of the alcoves i thought i detected a presence there a hint of motion beyond the goldenarched doorway leading to another and somewhat similar room. as i approached the arch i began to perceive the presence more clearly; and then, with the first and last sound i ever uttered a ghastly ululation that revolted me almost as poignantly as its noxious cause i beheld in full, frightful vividness the inconceivable, indescribable, and unmentionable monstrosity which had by its simple appearance changed a merry company to a herd of delirious fugitives. i cannot even hint what it was like, for it was a compound of all that is unclean, uncanny, unwelcome, abnormal, and detestable. it was the ghoulish shade of decay, antiquity, and dissolution; the putrid, dripping eidolon of unwholesome revelation, the awful baring of that which the merciful earth should always hide. god knows it was not of this world or no longer of this world yet to my horror i saw in its eatenaway and bonerevealing outlines a leering, abhorrent travesty on the human shape; and in its mouldy, disintegrating apparel an unspeakable quality that chilled me even more. i was almost paralysed, but not too much so to make a feeble effort towards flight; a backward stumble which failed to break the spell in which the nameless, voiceless monster held me. my eyes bewitched by the glassy orbs which stared loathsomely into them, refused to close; though they were mercifully blurred, and showed the terrible object but indistinctly after the first shock. i tried to raise my hand to shut out the sight, yet so stunned were my nerves that my arm could not fully obey my will. the attempt, however, was enough to disturb my balance; so that i had to stagger forward several steps to avoid falling. as i did so i became suddenly and agonizingly aware of the nearness of the carrion thing, whose hideous hollow breathing i half fancied i could hear. nearly mad, i found myself yet able to throw out a hand to ward off the foetid apparition which pressed so close; when in one cataclysmic second of cosmic nightmarishness and hellish accident my fingers touched the rotting outstretched paw of the monster beneath the golden arch. i did not shriek, but all the fiendish ghouls that ride the nightwind shrieked for me as in that same second there crashed down upon my mind a single fleeting avalanche of soulannihilating memory. i knew in that second all that had been; i remembered beyond the frightful castle and the trees, and recognized the altered edifice in which i now stood; i recognized, most terrible of all, the unholy abomination that stood leering before me as i withdrew my sullied fingers from its own. but in the cosmos there is balm as well as bitterness, and that balm is nepenthe. in the supreme horror of that second i forgot what had horrified me, and the burst of black memory vanished in a chaos of echoing images. in a dream i fled from that haunted and accursed pile, and ran swiftly and silently in the moonlight. when i returned to the churchyard place of marble and went down the steps i found the stone trapdoor immovable; but i was not sorry, for i had hated the antique castle and the trees. now i ride with the mocking and friendly ghouls on the nightwind, and play by day amongst the catacombs of nephrenka in the sealed and unknown valley of hadoth by the nile. i know that light is not for me, save that of the moon over the rock tombs of neb, nor any gaiety save the unnamed feasts of nitokris beneath the great pyramid; yet in my new wildness and freedom i almost welcome the bitterness of alienage. for although nepenthe has calmed me, i know always that i am an outsider; a stranger in this century and among those who are still men. this i have known ever since i stretched out my fingers to the abomination within that great gilded frame; stretched out my fingers and touched a cold and unyielding surface of polished glass. the rats in the walls with this sole heir denounced as a murderer, the estate had reverted to the crown, nor had the accused man made any attempt to exculpate himself or regain his property. shaken by some horror greater than that of conscience or the law, and expressing only a frantic wish to exclude the ancient edifice from his sight and memory, walter de la poer, eleventh baron exham, fled to virginia and there founded the family which by the next century had become known as delapore. exham priory had remained untenanted, though later allotted to the estates of the norrys family and much studied because of its peculiarly composite architecture; an architecture involving gothic towers resting on a saxon or romanesque substructure, whose foundation in turn was of a still earlier order or blend of orders roman, and even druidic or native cymric, if legends speak truly. this foundation was a very singular thing, being merged on one side with the solid limestone of the precipice from whose brink the priory overlooked a desolate valley three miles west of the village of anchester. architects and antiquarians loved to examine this strange relic of forgotten centuries, but the country folk hated it. they had hated it hundreds of years before, when my ancestors lived there, and they hated it now, with the moss and mould of abandonment on it. i had not been a day in anchester before i knew i came of an accursed house. and this week workmen have blown up exham priory, and are busy obliterating the traces of its foundations. the bare statistics of my ancestry i had always known, together with the fact that my first american forebear had come to the colonies under a strange cloud. of details, however, i had been kept wholly ignorant through the policy of reticence always maintained by the delapores. unlike our planter neighbours, we seldom boasted of crusading ancestors or other mediaeval and renaissance heroes; nor was any kind of tradition handed down except what may have been recorded in the sealed envelope left before the civil war by every squire to his eldest son for posthumous opening. the glories we cherished were those achieved since the migration; the glories of a proud and honourable, if somewhat reserved and unsocial virginia line. during the war our fortunes were extinguished and our whole existence changed by the burning of carfax, our home on the banks of the james. my grandfather, advanced in years, had perished in that incendiary outrage, and with him the envelope that had bound us all to the past. i can recall that fire today as i saw it then at the age of seven, with the federal soldiers shouting, the women screaming, and the negroes howling and praying. my father was in the army, defending richmond, and after many formalities my mother and i were passed through the lines to join him. when the war ended we all moved north, whence my mother had come; and i grew to manhood, middle age, and ultimate wealth as a stolid yankee. neither my father nor i ever knew what our hereditary envelope had contained, and as i merged into the greyness of massachusetts business life i lost all interest in the mysteries which evidently lurked far back in my family tree. had i suspected their nature, how gladly i would have left exham priory to its moss, bats and cobwebs! as i gradually recovered the image of the edifice as it had been when my ancestors left it over three centuries before, i began to hire workmen for the reconstruction. in every case i was forced to go outside the immediate locality, for the anchester villagers had an almost unbelievable fear and hatred of the place. the sentiment was so great that it was sometimes communicated to the outside labourers, causing numerous desertions; whilst its scope appeared to include both the priory and its ancient family. my son had told me that he was somewhat avoided during his visits because he was a de la poer, and i now found myself subtly ostracized for a like reason until i convinced the peasants how little i knew of my heritage. even then they sullenly disliked me, so that i had to collect most of the village traditions through the mediation of norrys. what the people could not forgive, perhaps, was that i had come to restore a symbol so abhorrent to them; for, rationally or not, they viewed exham priory as nothing less than a haunt of fiends and werewolves. piecing together the tales which norrys collected for me, and supplementing them with the accounts of several savants who had studied the ruins, i deduced that exham priory stood on the site of a prehistoric temple; a druidical or antedruidical thing which must have been contemporary with stonehenge. that indescribable rites had been celebrated there, few doubted, and there were unpleasant tales of the transference of these rites into the cybele worship which the romans had introduced. the worst characters, apparently, were the barons and their direct heirs; at least, most was whispered about these. if of healthier inclinations, it was said, an heir would early and mysteriously die to make way for another more typical scion. there seemed to be an inner cult in the family, presided over by the head of the house, and sometimes closed except to a few members. temperament rather than ancestry was evidently the basis of this cult, for it was entered by several who married into the family. lady margaret trevor from cornwall, wife of godfrey, the second son of the fifth baron, became a favourite bane of children all over the countryside, and the daemon heroine of a particularly horrible old ballad not yet extinct near the welsh border. preserved in balladry, too, though not illustrating the same point, is the hideous tale of lady mary de la poer, who shortly after her marriage to the earl of shrewsfield was killed by him and his mother, both of the slayers being absolved and blessed by the priest to whom they confessed what they dared not repeat to the world. these myths and ballads, typical as they were of crude superstition, repelled me greatly. their persistence, and their application to so long a line of my ancestors, were especially annoying; whilst the imputations of monstrous habits proved unpleasantly reminiscent of the one known scandal of my immediate forebears the case of my cousin, young randolph delapore of carfax who went among the negroes and became a voodoo priest after he returned from the mexican war. i was much less disturbed by the vaguer tales of wails and howlings in the barren, windswept valley beneath the limestone cliff; of the graveyard stenches after the spring rains; of the floundering, squealing white thing on which sir john claves horse had trod one night in a lonely field; and of the servant who had gone mad at what he saw in the priory in the full light of day. these things were hackneyed spectral lore, and i was at that time a pronounced sceptic. the accounts of vanished peasants were less to be dismissed, though not especially significant in view of mediaeval custom. prying curiosity meant death, and more than one severed head had been publicly shown on the bastions now effaced around exham priory. a few of the tales were exceedingly picturesque, and made me wish i had learnt more of the comparative mythology in my youth. there was, for instance, the belief that a legion of batwinged devils kept witches sabbath each night at the priory a legion whose sustenance might explain the disproportionate abundance of coarse vegetables harvested in the vast gardens. and, most vivid of all, there was the dramatic epic of the rats the scampering army of obscene vermin which had burst forth from the castle three months after the tragedy that doomed it to desertion the lean, filthy, ravenous army which had swept all before it and devoured fowl, cats, dogs, hogs, sheep, and even two hapless human beings before its fury was spent. around that unforgettable rodent army a whole separate cycle of myths revolves, for it scattered among the village homes and brought curses and horrors in its train. such was the lore that assailed me as i pushed to completion, with an elderly obstinacy, the work of restoring my ancestral home. it must not be imagined for a moment that these tales formed my principal psychological environinent. on the other hand, i was constantly praised and encouraged by capt. norrys and the antiquarians who surrounded and aided me. when the task was done, over two years after its commencement, i viewed the great rooms, wainscoted walls, vaulted ceilings, mullioned windows, and broad staircases with a pride which fully compensated for the prodigious expense of the restoration. every attribute of the middle ages was cunningly reproduced and the new parts blended perfectly with the original walls and foundations. the seat of my fathers was complete, and i looked forward to redeeming at last the local fame of the line which ended in me. i could reside here permanently, and prove that a de la poer (for i had adopted again the original spelling of the name) need not be a fiend. my comfort was perhaps augmented by the fact that, although exham priory was mediaevally fitted, its interior was in truth wholly new and free from old vermin and old ghosts alike. for five days our routine proceeded with the utmost placidity, my time being spent mostly in the codification of old family data. i had now obtained some very circumstantial accounts of the final tragedy and flight of walter de la poer, which i conceived to be the probable contents of the hereditary paper lost in the fire at carfax. it appeared that my ancestor was accused with much reason of having killed all the other members of his household, except four servant confederates, in their sleep, about two weeks after a shocking discovery which changed his whole demeanour, but which, except by implication, he disclosed to no one save perhaps the servants who assisted him and afterwards fled beyond reach. this deliberate slaughter, which included a father, three brothers, and two sisters, was largely condoned by the villagers, and so slackly treated by the law that its perpetrator escaped honoured, unharmed, and undisguised to virginia; the general whispered sentiment being that he had purged the land of an immemorial curse. what discovery had prompted an act so terrible, i could scarcely even conjecture. walter de la poer must have known for years the sinister tales about his family, so that this material could have given him no fresh impulse. had he, then, witnessed some appalling ancient rite, or stumbled upon some frightful and revealing symbol in the priory or its vicinity? he was reputed to have been a shy, gentle youth in england. in virginia he seemed not so much hard or bitter as harassed and apprehensive. he was spoken of in the diary of another gentleman adventurer, francis harley of bellview, as a man of unexampled justice, honour, and delicacy. what i afterward remembered is merely this that my old black cat, whose moods i know so well, was undoubtedly alert and anxious to an extent wholly out of keeping with his natural character. he roved from room to room, restless and disturbed, and sniffed constantly about the walls which formed part of the gothic structure. i realize how trite this sounds like the inevitable dog in the ghost story, which always growls before his master sees the sheeted figure yet i cannot consistently suppress it. the following day a servant complained of restlessness among all the cats in the house. he came to me in my study, a lofty west room on the second storey, with groined arches, black oak panelling, and a triple gothic window overlooking the limestone cliff and desolate valley; and even as he spoke i saw the jetty form of niggerman creeping along the west wall and scratching at the new panels which overlaid the ancient stone. i told the man that there must be a singular odour or emanation from the old stonework, imperceptible to human senses, but affecting the delicate organs of cats even through the new woodwork. this i truly believed, and when the fellow suggested the presence of mice or rats, i mentioned that there had been no rats there for three hundred years, and that even the field mice of the surrounding country could hardly be found in these high walls, where they had never been known to stray. that afternoon i called on capt. norrys, and he assured me that it would be quite incredible for field mice to infest the priory in such a sudden and unprecedented fashion. that night, dispensing as usual with a valet, i retired in the west tower chamber which i had chosen as my own, reached from the study by a stone staircase and short gallery the former partly ancient, the latter entirely restored. this room was circular, very high, and without wainscoting, being hung with arras which i had myself chosen in london. seeing that niggerman was with me, i shut the heavy gothic door and retired by the light of the electric bulbs which so cleverly counterfeited candles, finally switching off the light and sinking on the carved and canopied fourposter, with the venerable cat in his accustomed place across my feet. i did not draw the curtains, but gazed out at the narrow window which i faced. there was a suspicion of aurora in the sky, and the delicate traceries of the window were pleasantly silhouetted. at some time i must have fallen quietly asleep, for i recall a distinct sense of leaving strange dreams, when the cat started violently from his placid position. i saw him in the faint auroral glow, head strained forward, fore feet on my ankles, and hind feet stretched behind. he was looking intensely at a point on the wall somewhat west of the window, a point which to my eye had nothing to mark it, but toward which all my attention was now directed. and as i watched, i knew that niggerman was not vainly excited. whether the arras actually moved i cannot say. i think it did, very slightly. but what i can swear to is that behind it i heard a low, distinct scurrying as of rats or mice. in a moment the cat had jumped bodily on the screening tapestry, bringing the affected section to the floor with his weight, and exposing a damp, ancient wall of stone; patched here and there by the restorers, and devoid of any trace of rodent prowlers. niggerman raced up and down the floor by this part of the wall, clawing the fallen arras and seemingly trying at times to insert a paw between the wall and the oaken floor. he found nothing, and after a time returned wearily to his place across my feet. i had not moved, but i did not sleep again that night. in the morning i questioned all the servants, and found that none of them had noticed anything unusual, save that the cook remembered the actions of a cat which had rested on her windowsill. this cat had howled at some unknown hour of the night, awaking the cook in time for her to see him dart purposefully out of the open door down the stairs. i drowsed away the noontime, and in the afternoon called again on capt. norrys, who became exceedingly interested in what i told him. the odd incidents so slight yet so curious appealed to his sense of the picturesque and elicited from him a number of reminiscenses of local ghostly lore. we were genuinely perplexed at the presence of rats, and norrys lent me some traps and paris green, which i had the servants place in strategic localities when i returned. i retired early, being very sleepy, but was harassed by dreams of the most horrible sort. i seemed to be looking down from an immense height upon a twilit grotto, kneedeep with filth, where a whitebearded daemon swineherd drove about with his staff a flock of fungous, flabby beasts whose appearance filled me with unutterable loathing. then, as the swineherd paused and nodded over his task, a mighty swarm of rats rained down on the stinking abyss and fell to devouring beasts and man alike. from this terrific vision i was abruptly awakened by the motions of niggerman, who had been sleeping as usual across my feet. this time i did not have to question the source of his snarls and hisses, and of the fear which made him sink his claws into my ankle, unconscious of their effect; for on every side of the chamber the walls were alive with nauseous sound the veminous slithering of ravenous, gigantic rats. there was now no aurora to show the state of the arras the fallen section of which had been replaced but i was not too frightened to switch on the light. as the bulbs leapt into radiance i saw a hideous shaking all over the tapestry, causing the somewhat peculiar designs to execute a singular dance of death. this motion disappeared almost at once, and the sound with it. springing out of bed, i poked at the arras with the long handle of a warmingpan that rested near, and lifted one section to see what lay beneath. there was nothing but the patched stone wall, and even the cat had lost his tense realization of abnormal presences. when i examined the circular trap that had been placed in the room, i found all of the openings sprung, though no trace remained of what had been caught and had escaped. further sleep was out of the question, so lighting a candle, i opened the door and went out in the gallery towards the stairs to my study, niggerman following at my heels. before we had reached the stone steps, however, the cat darted ahead of me and vanished down the ancient flight. as i descended the stairs myself, i became suddenly aware of sounds in the great room below; sounds of a nature which could not be mistaken. the oakpanelled walls were alive with rats, scampering and milling whilst niggerman was racing about with the fury of a baffled hunter. reaching the bottom, i switched on the light, which did not this time cause the noise to subside. the rats continued their riot, stampeding with such force and distinctness that i could finally assign to their motions a definite direction. these creatures, in numbers apparently inexhaustible, were engaged in one stupendous migration from inconceivable heights to some depth conceivably or inconceivably below. i now heard steps in the corridor, and in another moment two servants pushed open the massive door. they were searching the house for some unknown source of disturbance which had thrown all the cats into a snarling panic and caused them to plunge precipitately down several flights of stairs and squat, yowling, before the closed door to the subcellar. i asked them if they had heard the rats, but they replied in the negative. and when i turned to call their attention to the sounds in the panels, i realized that the noise had ceased. with the two men, i went down to the door of the subcellar, but found the cats already dispersed. later i resolved to explore the crypt below, but for the present i merely made a round of the traps. all were sprung, yet all were tenantless. satisfying myself that no one had heard the rats save the felines and me, i sat in my study till morning, thinking profoundly and recalling every scrap of legend i had unearthed concerning the building i inhabited. i slept some in the forenoon, leaning back in the one comfortable library chair which my mediaeval plan of furnishing could not banish. later i telephoned to capt. norrys, who came over and helped me explore the subcellar. absolutely nothing untoward was found, although we could not repress a thrill at the knowledge that this vault was built by roman hands. every low arch and massive pillar was roman not the debased romanesque of the bungling saxons, but the severe and harmonious classicism of the age of the caesars; indeed, the walls abounded with inscriptions familiar to the antiquarians who had repeatedly explored the place things like p. getae. prop... temp... dona... and l. praeg... vs... pontifi... atys... the reference to atys made me shiver, for i had read catullus and knew something of the hideous rites of the eastern god, whose worship was so mixed with that of cybele. norrys and i, by the light of lanterns, tried to interpret the odd and nearly effaced designs on certain irregularly rectangular blocks of stone generally held to be altars, but could make nothing of them. we remembered that one pattern, a sort of rayed sun, was held by students to imply a nonroman origin suggesting that these altars had merely been adopted by the roman priests from some older and perhaps aboriginal temple on the same site. on one of these blocks were some brown stains which made me wonder. the largest, in the centre of the room, had certain features on the upper surface which indicated its connection with fire probably burnt offerings. such were the sights in that crypt before whose door the cats howled, and where norrys and i now determined to pass the night. couches were brought down by the servants, who were told not to mind any nocturnal actions of the cats, and niggerman was admitted as much for help as for companionship. we decided to keep the great oak door a modern replica with slits for ventilation tightly closed; and, with this attended to, we retired with lanterns still burning to await whatever might occur. the vault was very deep in the foundations of the priory, and undoubtedly far down on the face of the beetling limestone cliff overlooking the waste valley. that it had been the goal of the scuffling and unexplainable rats i could not doubt, though why, i could not tell. as we lay there expectantly, i found my vigil occasionally mixed with halfformed dreams from which the uneasy motions of the cat across my feet would rouse me. these dreams were not wholesome, but horribly like the one i had had the night before. i saw again the twilit grotto, and the swineherd with his unmentionable fungous beasts wallowing in filth, and as i looked at these things they seemed nearer and more distinct so distinct that i could almost observe their features. then i did observe the flabby features of one of them and awakened with such a scream that niggerman started up, whilst capt. norrys, who had not slept, laughed considerably. norrys might have laughed more or perhaps less had he known what it was that made me scream. but i did not remember myself till later. ultimate horror often paralyses memory in a merciful way. norrys waked me when the phenomena began. out of the same frightful dream i was called by his gentle shaking and his urging to listen to the cats. indeed, there was much to listen to, for beyond the closed door at the head of the stone steps was a veritable nightmare of feline yelling and clawing, whilst niggerman, unmindful of his kindred outside, was running excitedly round the bare stone walls, in which i heard the same babel of scurrying rats that had troubled me the night before. an acute terror now rose within me, for here were anomalies which nothing normal could well explain. these rats, if not the creatures of a madness which i shared with the cats alone, must be burrowing and sliding in roman walls i had thought to be solid limestone blocks ... unless perhaps the action of water through more than seventeen centuries had eaten winding tunnels which rodent bodies had worn clear and ample ... but even so, the spectral horror was no less; for if these were living vermin why did not norrys hear their disgusting commotion? why did he urge me to watch niggerman and listen to the cats outside, and why did he guess wildly and vaguely at what could have aroused them? by the time i had managed to tell him, as rationally as i could, what i thought i was hearing, my ears gave me the last fading impression of scurrying; which had retreated still downward, far underneath this deepest of subcellars till it seemed as if the whole cliff below were riddled with questing rats. norrys was not as sceptical as i had anticipated, but instead seemed profoundly moved. he motioned to me to notice that the cats at the door had ceased their clamour, as if giving up the rats for lost; whilst niggerman had a burst of renewed restlessness, and was clawing frantically around the bottom of the large stone altar in the centre of the room, which was nearer norrys couch than mine. my fear of the unknown was at this point very great. something astounding had occurred, and i saw that capt. norrys, a younger, stouter, and presumably more naturally materialistic man, was affected fully as much as myself perhaps because of his lifelong and intimate familiarity with local legend. we could for the moment do nothing but watch the old black cat as he pawed with decreasing fervour at the base of the altar, occasionally looking up and mewing to me in that persuasive manner which he used when he wished me to perform some favour for him. norrys now took a lantern close to the altar and examined the place where niggerman was pawing; silently kneeling and scraping away the lichens of the centuries which joined the massive preroman block to the tessellated floor. he did not find anything, and was about to abandon his efforts when i noticed a trivial circumstance which made me shudder, even though it implied nothing more than i had already imagined. i told him of it, and we both looked at its almost imperceptible manifestation with the fixedness of fascinated discovery and acknowledgment. it was only this that the flame of the lantern set down near the altar was slightly but certainly flickering from a draught of air which it had not before received, and which came indubitably from the crevice between floor and altar where norrys was scraping away the lichens. we spent the rest of the night in the brilliantlylighted study, nervously discussing what we should do next. the discovery that some vault deeper than the deepest known masonry of the romans underlay this accursed pile, some vault unsuspected by the curious antiquarians of three centuries, would have been sufficient to excite us without any background of the sinister. as it was, the fascination became twofold; and we paused in doubt whether to abandon our search and quit the priory forever in superstitious caution, or to gratify our sense of adventure and brave whatever horrors might await us in the unknown depths. by morning we had compromised, and decided to go to london to gather a group of archaeologists and scientific men fit to cope with the mystery. it should be mentioned that before leaving the subcellar we had vainly tried to move the central altar which we now recognized as the gate to a new pit of nameless fear. what secret would open the gate, wiser men than we would have to find. during many days in london capt. norrys and i presented our facts, conjectures, and legendary anecdotes to five eminent authorities, all men who could be trusted to respect any family disclosures which future explorations might develop. we found most of them little disposed to scoff but, instead, intensely interested and sincerely sympathetic. it is hardly necessary to name them all, but i may say that they included sir william brinton, whose excavations in the troad excited most of the world in their day. as we all took the train for anchester i felt myself poised on the brink of frightful revelations, a sensation symbolized by the air of mourning among the many americans at the unexpected death of the president on the other side of the world. i myself retired in my own tower chamber, with niggerman across my feet. sleep came quickly, but hideous dreams assailed me. there was a vision of a roman feast like that of trimalchio, with a horror in a covered platter. then came that damnable, recurrent thing about the swineherd and his filthy drove in the twilit grotto. yet when i awoke it was full daylight, with normal sounds in the house below. the rats, living or spectral, had not troubled me; and niggerman was still quietly asleep. on going down, i found that the same tranquillity had prevailed elsewhere; a condition which one of the assembled servants a fellow named thornton, devoted to the psychic rather absurdly laid to the fact that i had now been shown the thing which certain forces had wished to show me. there now lay revealed such a horror as would have overwhelmed us had we not been prepared. through a nearly square opening in the tiled floor, sprawling on a flight of stone steps so prodigiously worn that it was little more than an inclined plane at the centre, was a ghastly array of human or semihuman bones. those which retained their collocation as skeletons showed attitudes of panic fear, and over all were the marks of rodent gnawing. the skulls denoted nothing short of utter idiocy, cretinism, or primitive semiapedom. above the hellishly littered steps arched a descending passage seemingly chiselled from the solid rock, and conducting a current of air. this current was not a sudden and noxious rush as from a closed vault, but a cool breeze with something of freshness in it. we did not pause long, but shiveringly began to clear a passage down the steps. it was then that sir william, examining the hewn walls, made the odd observation that the passage, according to the direction of the strokes, must have been chiselled from beneath. i must be very deliberate now, and choose my words. after ploughing down a few steps amidst the gnawled bones we saw that there was light ahead; not any mystic phosphorescence, but a filtered daylight which could not come except from unknown fissures in the cliff that overlooked the waste valley. that such fissures had escaped notice from outside was hardly remarkable, for not only is the valley wholly uninhabited, but the cliff is so high and beetling that only an aeronaut could study its face in detail. a few steps more, and our breaths were literally snatched from us by what we saw; so literally that thornton, the psychic investigator, actually fainted in the arms of the dazed mem who stood behind him. norrys, his plump face utterly white and flabby, simply cried out inarticulately; whilst i think that what i did was to gasp or hiss, and cover my eyes. the man behind me the only one of the party older than i croaked the hackneyed my god! in the most cracked voice i ever heard. of seven cultivated men, only sir william brinton retained his composure, a thing the more to his credit because he led the party and must have seen the sight first. it was a twilit grotto of enormous height, stretching away farther than any eye could see; a subterraneous world of limitless mystery and horrible suggestion. there were buildings and other architectural remains in one terrified glance i saw a weird pattern of tumuli, a savage circle of monoliths, a lowdomed roman ruin, a sprawling saxon pile, and an early english edifice of wood but all these were dwarfed by the ghoulish spectacle presented by the general surface of the ground. for yards about the steps extended an insane tangle of human bones, or bones at least as human as those on the steps. like a foamy sea they stretched, some fallen apart, but others wholly or partly articulated as skeletons; these latter invariably in postures of daemoniac frenzy, either fighting off some menace or clutching other forms with cannibal intent. when dr trask, the anthropologist, stopped to classify the skulls, he found a degraded mixture which utterly baffled him. they were mostly lower than the piltdown man in the scale of evolution, but in every case definitely human. many were of higher grade, and a very few were the skulls of supremely and sensitively developed types. all the bones were gnawed, mostly by rats, but somewhat by others of the halfhuman drove. mixed with them were many tiny hones of rats fallen members of the lethal army which closed the ancient epic. i wonder that any man among us lived and kept his sanity through that hideous day of discovery. not hoffman nor huysmans could conceive a scene more wildly incredible, more frenetically repellent, or more gothically grotesque than the twilit grotto through which we seven staggered; each stumbling on revelation after revelation, and trying to keep for the nonce from thinking of the events which must have taken place there three hundred, or a thousand, or two thousand or ten thousand years ago. it was the antechamber of hell, and poor thornton fainted again when trask told him that some of the skeleton things must have descended as quadrupeds through the last twenty or more generations. horror piled on horror as we began to interpret the architectural remains. the quadruped things with their occasional recruits from the biped class had been kept in stone pens, out of which they must have broken in their last delirium of hunger or ratfear. there had been great herds of them, evidently fattened on the coarse vegetables whose remains could be found as a sort of poisonous ensilage at the bottom of the huge stone bins older than rome. i knew now why my ancestors had had such excessive gardens would to heaven i could forget! the purpose of the herds i did not have to ask. what i did venture to enter was the low saxon building whose oaken door had fallen, and there i found a terrible row of ten stone cells with rusty bars. three had tenants, all skeletons of high grade, and on the bony forefinger of one i found a seal ring with my own coatofarms. sir william found a vault with far older cells below the roman chapel, but these cells were empty. below them was a low crypt with cases of formally arranged bones, some of them bearing terrible parallel inscriptions carved in latin, greek, and the tongue of phyrgia. meanwhile, dr trask had opened one of the prehistoric tumuli, and brought to light skulls which were slightly more human than a gorillas, and which bore indescribably ideographic carvings. through all this horror my cat stalked unperturbed. once i saw him monstrously perched atop a mountain of bones, and wondered at the secrets that might lie behind his yellow eyes. having grasped to some slight degree the frightful revelations of this twilit area an area so hideously foreshadowed by my recurrent dream we turned to that apparently boundless depth of midnight cavern where no ray of light from the cliff could penetrate. we shall never know what sightless stygian worlds yawn beyond the little distance we went, for it was decided that such secrets are not good for mankind. but there was plenty to engross us close at hand, for we had not gone far before the searchlights showed that accursed infinity of pits in which the rats had feasted, and whose sudden lack of replenishment had driven the ravenous rodent army first to turn on the living herds of starving things, and then to burst forth from the priory in that historic orgy of devastation which the peasants will never forget. god! those carrion black pits of sawed, picked bones and opened skulls! those nightmare chasms choked with the pithecanthropoid, celtic, roman, and english bones of countless unhallowed centuries! some of them were full, and none can say how deep they had once been. others were still bottomless to our searchlights, and peopled by unnamable fancies. what, i thought, of the hapless rats that stumbled into such traps amidst the blackness of their quests in this grisly tartarus? once my foot slipped near a horribly yawning brink, and i had a moment of ecstatic fear. i must have been musing a long time, for i could not see any of the party but plump capt. norrys. then there came a sound from that inky, boundless, farther distance that i thought i knew; and i saw my old black cat dart past me like a winged egyptian god, straight into the illimitable gulf of the unknown. but i was not far behind, for there was no doubt after another second. it was the eldritch scurrying of those fiendborn rats, always questing for new horrors, and determined to lead me on even unto those grinning caverns of earths centre where nyarlathotep, the mad faceless god, howls blindly in the darkness to the piping of two amorphous idiot fluteplayers. my searchlight expired, but still i ran. i heard voices, and yowls, and echoes, but above all there gently rose that impious, insidious scurrying; gently rising, rising, as a stiff bloated corpse gently rises above an oily river that flows under the endless onyx bridges to a black, putrid sea. something bumped into me something soft and plump. it must have been the rats; the viscous, gelatinous, ravenous army that feast on the dead and the living ... why shouldnt rats eat a de la poer as a de la poer eats forbidden things? ... the war ate my boy, damn them all ... and the yanks ate carfax with flames and burnt grandsire delapore and the secret ... no, no, i tell you, i am not that daemon swineherd in the twilit grotto! it was not edward norrys fat face on that flabby fungous thing! who says i am a de la poer? he lived, but my boy died! ... shall a norrys hold the land of a de la poer? ... its voodoo, i tell you ... that spotted snake ... curse you, thornton, ill teach you to faint at what my family do! ... sblood, thou stinkard, ill learn ye how to gust ... wolde ye swynke me thilke wys?... magna mater! magna mater!... atys... dia ad aghaidhs ad aodaun... agus bas dunarch ort! dhonas s dholas ort, agus leatsa!... ungl unl... rrlh ... chchch... this is what they say i said when they found me in the blackness after three hours; found me crouching in the blackness over the plump, halfeaten body of capt. norrys, with my own cat leaping and tearing at my throat. now they have blown up exham priory, taken my niggerman away from me, and shut me into this barred room at hanwell with fearful whispers about my heredity and experience. thornton is in the next room, but they prevent me from talking to him. they are trying, too, to suppress most of the facts concerning the priory. when i speak of poor norrys they accuse me of this hideous thing, but they must know that i did not do it. they must know it was the rats; the slithering scurrying rats whose scampering will never let me sleep; the daemon rats that race behind the padding in this room and beckon me down to greater horrors than i have ever known; the rats they can never hear; the rats, the rats in the walls. keener newsfollowers, however, wondered at the prodigious number of arrests, the abnormally large force of men used in making them, and the secrecy surrounding the disposal of the prisoners. no trials, or even definite charges were reported; nor were any of the captives seen thereafter in the regular gaols of the nation. there were vague statements about disease and concentration camps, and later about dispersal in various naval and military prisons, but nothing positive ever developed. innsmouth itself was left almost depopulated, and it is even now only beginning to show signs of a sluggishly revived existence. complaints from many liberal organizations were met with long confidential discussions, and representatives were taken on trips to certain camps and prisons. as a result, these societies became surprisingly passive and reticent. newspaper men were harder to manage, but seemed largely to cooperate with the government in the end. only one paper a tabloid always discounted because of its wild policy mentioned the deep diving submarine that discharged torpedoes downward in the marine abyss just beyond devil reef. that item, gathered by chance in a haunt of sailors, seemed indeed rather farfetched; since the low, black reef lay a full mile and a half out from innsmouth harbour. people around the country and in the nearby towns muttered a great deal among themselves, but said very little to the outer world. they had talked about dying and halfdeserted innsmouth for nearly a century, and nothing new could be wilder or more hideous than what they had whispered and hinted at years before. many things had taught them secretiveness, and there was no need to exert pressure on them. besides, they really knew little; for wide salt marshes, desolate and unpeopled, kept neighbors off from innsmouth on the landward side. but at last i am going to defy the ban on speech about this thing. results, i am certain, are so thorough that no public harm save a shock of repulsion could ever accrue from a hinting of what was found by those horrified men at innsmouth. besides, what was found might possibly have more than one explanation. i do not know just how much of the whole tale has been told even to me, and i have many reasons for not wishing to probe deeper. for my contact with this affair has been closer than that of any other layman, and i have carried away impressions which are yet to drive me to drastic measures. i never heard of innsmouth till the day before i saw it for the first and so far last time. i was celebrating my coming of age by a tour of new england sightseeing, antiquarian, and genealogical and had planned to go directly from ancient newburyport to arkham, whence my mothers family was derived. i had no car, but was travelling by train, trolley and motorcoach, always seeking the cheapest possible route. in newburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to arkham; and it was only at the station ticketoffice, when i demurred at the high fare, that i learned about innsmouth. the stout, shrewdfaced agent, whose speech shewed him to be no local man, seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy, and made a suggestion that none of my other informants had offered. that was the first i ever heard of shadowed innsmouth. any reference to a town not shown on common maps or listed in recent guidebooks would have interested me, and the agents odd manner of allusion roused something like real curiosity. a town able to inspire such dislike in it its neighbors, i thought, must be at least rather unusual, and worthy of a tourists attention. if it came before arkham i would stop off there and so i asked the agent to tell me something about it. he was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling slightly superior to what he said. more empty houses than there are people, i guess, and no business to speak of except fishing and lobstering. everybody trades mostly either here or in arkham or ipswich. once they had quite a few mills, but nothings left now except one gold refinery running on the leanest kind of part time. that refinery, though, used to he a big thing, and old man marsh, who owns it, must be richern croesus. queer old duck, though, and sticks mighty close in his home. hes supposed to have developed some skin disease or deformity late in life that makes him keep out of sight. grandson of captain obed marsh, who founded the business. his mother seems tove been some kind of foreigner they say a south sea islander so everybody raised cain when he married an ipswich girl fifty years ago. they always do that about innsmouth people, and folks here and hereabouts always try to cover up any innsmouth blood they have in em. but marshs children and grandchildren look just like anyone else fars i can see. ive had em pointed out to me here though, come to think of it, the elder children dont seem to be around lately. never saw the old man. you ought to hear, though, what some of the oldtimers tell about the black reef off the coast devil reef, they call it. its well above water a good part of the time, and never much below it, but at that you could hardly call it an island. the story is that theres a whole legion of devils seen sometimes on that reef sprawled about, or darting in and out of some kind of caves near the top. its a rugged, uneven thing, a good bit over a mile out, and toward the end of shipping days sailors used to make big detours just to avoid it. that is, sailors that didnt hail from innsmouth. one of the things they had against old captain marsh was that he was supposed to land on it sometimes at night when the tide was right. maybe he did, for i dare say the rock formation was interesting, and its just barely possible he was looking for pirate loot and maybe finding it; but there was talk of his dealing with demons there. fact is, i guess on the whole it was really the captain that gave the bad reputation to the reef. but the real thing behind the way folks feel is simply race prejudice and i dont say im blaming those that hold it. i hate those innsmouth folks myself, and i wouldnt care to go to their town. i spose you know though i can see youre a westerner by your talk what a lot our new england ships used to have to do with queer ports in africa, asia, the south seas, and everywhere else, and what queer kinds of people they sometimes brought back with em. youve probably heard about the salem man that came home with a chinese wife, and maybe you know theres still a bunch of fiji islanders somewhere around cape cod. well, there must be something like that back of the innsmouth people. the place always was badly cut off from the rest of the country by marshes and creeks and we cant be sure about the ins and outs of the matter; but its pretty clear that old captain marsh must have brought home some odd specimens when he had all three of his ships in commission back in the twenties and thirties. there certainly is a strange kind of streak in the innsmouth folks today i dont know how to explain it but it sort of makes you crawl. youll notice a little in sargent if you take his bus. some of em have queer narrow heads with flat noses and bulgy, starry eyes that never seem to shut, and their skin aint quite right. rough and scabby, and the sides of the necks are all shriveled or creased up. get bald, too, very young. the older fellows look the worst fact is, i dont believe ive ever seen a very old chap of that kind. guess they must die of looking in the glass! animals hate em they used to have lots of horse trouble before the autos came in. nobody around here or in arkham or ipswich will have anything to do with em, and they act kind of offish themselves when they come to town or when anyone tries to fish on their grounds. queer how fish are always thick off innsmouth harbour when there aint any anywhere else around but just try to fish there yourself and see how the folks chase you off! those people used to come here on the railroad walking and taking the train at rowley after the branch was dropped but now they use that bus. yes, theres a hotel in innsmouth called the gilman house but i dont believe it can amount to much. i wouldnt advise you to try it. better stay over here and take the ten oclock bus tomorrow morning; then you can get an evening bus there for arkham at eight oclock. there was a factory inspector who stopped at the gilman a couple of years ago and he had a lot of unpleasant hints about the place. seems they get a queer crowd there, for this fellow heard voices in other rooms though most of em was empty that gave him the shivers. it was foreign talk he thought, but he said the bad thing about it was the kind of voice that sometimes spoke. it sounded so unnatural slopping like, he said that he didnt dare undress and go to sleep. just waited up and lit out the first thing in the morning. the talk went on most all night. this fellow casey, his name was had a lot to say about how the innsmouth folk, watched him and seemed kind of on guard. he found the marsh refinery a queer place its in an old mill on the lower falls of the manuxet. what he said tallied up with what id heard. books in bad shape, and no clear account of any kind of dealings. you know its always been a kind of mystery where the marshes get the gold they refine. theyve never seemed to do much buying in that line, but years ago they shipped out an enormous lot of ingots. used to be talk of a queer foreign kind of jewelry that the sailors and refinery men sometimes sold on the sly, or that was seen once or twice on some of the marsh womenfolks. people allowed maybe old captain obed traded for it in some heathen port, especially since he always ordered stacks of glass beads and trinkets such as seafaring men used to get for native trade. others thought and still think hed found an old pirate cache out on devil reef. but heres a funny thing. the old captains been dead these sixty years, and theres aint been a goodsized ship out of the place since the civil war; but just the same the marshes still keep on buying a few of those native trade things mostly glass and rubber gewgaws, they tell me. maybe the innsmouth folks like em to look at themselves gawd knows theyve gotten to be about as bad as south sea cannibals and guinea savages. nobody can ever keep track of these people, and state school officials and census men have a devil of a time. you can bet that prying strangers aint welcome around innsmouth. ive heard personally of moren one business or government man thats disappeared there, and theres loose talk of one who went crazy and is out at danvers now. they must have fixed up some awful scare for that fellow. thats why i wouldnt go at night if i was you. ive never been there and have no wish to go, but i guess a daytime trip couldnt hurt you even though the people hereabouts will advise you not to make it. if youre just sightseeing, and looking for oldtime stuff, innsmouth ought to be quite a place for you. and so i spent part of that evening at the newburyport public library looking up data about innsmouth. when i had tried to question the natives in the shops, the lunchroom, the garages, and the fire station, i had found them even harder to get started than the ticket agent had predicted; and realized that i could not spare the time to overcome their first instinctive reticence. they had a kind of obscure suspiciousness, as if there were something amiss with anyone too much interested in innsmouth. at the y. m. c. a., where i was stopping, the clerk merely discouraged my going to such a dismal, decadent place; and the people at the library shewed much the same attitude. clearly, in the eyes of the educated, innsmouth was merely an exaggerated case of civic degeneration. references to decline were few, though the significance of the later record was unmistakable. after the civil war all industrial life was confined to the marsh refining company, and the marketing of gold ingots formed the only remaining bit of major commerce aside from the eternal fishing. that fishing paid less and less as the price of the commodity fell and largescale corporations offered competition, but there was never a dearth of fish around innsmouth harbour. foreigners seldom settled there, and there was some discreetly veiled evidence that a number of poles and portuguese who had tried it had been scattered in a peculiarly drastic fashion. most interesting of all was a glancing reference to the strange jewelry vaguely associated with innsmouth. it had evidently impressed the whole countryside more than a little, for mention was made of specimens in the museum of miskatonic university at arkham, and in the display room of the newburyport historical society. the fragmentary descriptions of these things were bald and prosaic, but they hinted to me an undercurrent of persistent strangeness. something about them seemed so odd and provocative that i could not put them out of my mind, and despite the relative lateness of the hour i resolved to see the local sample said to be a large, queerlyproportioned thing evidently meant for a tiara if it could possibly be arranged. the librarian gave me a note of introduction to the curator of the society, a miss anna tilton, who lived nearby, and after a brief explanation that ancient gentlewoman was kind enough to pilot me into the closed building, since the hour was not outrageously late. the collection was a notable one indeed, but in my present mood i had eyes for nothing but the bizarre object which glistened in a corner cupboard under the electric lights. it took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make me literally gasp at the strange, unearthly splendour of the alien, opulent phantasy that rested there on a purple velvet cushion. even now i can hardly describe what i saw, though it was clearly enough a sort of tiara, as the description had said. it was tall in front, and with a very large and curiously irregular periphery, as if designed for a head of almost freakishly elliptical outline. the material seemed to be predominantly gold, though a weird lighter lustrousness hinted at some strange alloy with an equally beautiful and scarcely identifiable metal. its condition was almost perfect, and one could have spent hours in studying the striking and puzzlingly untraditional designs some simply geometrical, and some plainly marine chased or moulded in high relief on its surface with a craftsmanship of incredible skill and grace. the longer i looked, the more the thing fascinated me; and in this fascination there was a curiously disturbing element hardly to be classified or accounted for. at first i decided that it was the queer otherworldly quality of the art which made me uneasy. all other art objects i had ever seen either belonged to some known racial or national stream, or else were consciously modernistic defiances of every recognized stream. this tiara was neither. it clearly belonged to some settled technique of infinite maturity and perfection, yet that technique was utterly remote from any eastern or western, ancient or modern which i had ever heard of or seen exemplified. it was as if the workmanship were that of another planet. however, i soon saw that my uneasiness had a second and perhaps equally potent source residing in the pictorial and mathematical suggestion of the strange designs. the patterns all hinted of remote secrets and unimaginable abysses in time and space, and the monotonously aquatic nature of the reliefs became almost sinister. among these reliefs were fabulous monsters of abhorrent grotesqueness and malignity half ichthyic and half batrachian in suggestion which one could not dissociate from a certain haunting and uncomfortable sense of pseudomemory, as if they called up some image from deep cells and tissues whose retentive functions are wholly primal and awesomely ancestral. at times i fancied that every contour of these blasphemous fishfrogs was overflowing with the ultimate quintessence of unknown and inhuman evil. miss tilton, comparing all possible hypotheses regarding its origin and its presence in new england, was inclined to believe that it formed part of some exotic pirate hoard discovered by old captain obed marsh. this view was surely not weakened by the insistent offers of purchase at a high price which the marshes began to make as soon as they knew of its presence, and which they repeated to this day despite the societys unvarying determination not to sell. as the good lady shewed me out of the building she made it clear that the pirate theory of the marsh fortune was a popular one among the intelligent people of the region. her own attitude toward shadowed innsmouth which she never seen was one of disgust at a community slipping far down the cultural scale, and she assured me that the rumours of devilworship were partly justified by a peculiar secret cult which had gained force there and engulfed all the orthodox churches. it was called, she said, the esoteric order of dagon, and was undoubtedly a debased, quasipagan thing imported from the east a century before, at a time when the innsmouth fisheries seemed to be going barren. its persistence among a simple people was quite natural in view of the sudden and permanent return of abundantly fine fishing, and it soon came to be the greatest influence in the town, replacing freemasonry altogether and taking up headquarters in the old masonic hall on new church green. all this, to the pious miss tilton, formed an excellent reason for shunning the ancient town of decay and desolation; but to me it was merely a fresh incentive. to my architectural and historical anticipations was now added an acute anthropological zeal, and i could scarcely sleep in my small room at the y as the night wore away. ii shortly before ten the next morning i stood with one small valise in front of hammonds drug store in old market square waiting for the innsmouth bus. as the hour for its arrival drew near i noticed a general drift of the loungers to other places up the street, or to the ideal lunch across the square. evidently the ticketagent had not exaggerated the dislike which local people bore toward innsmouth and its denizens. in a few moments a small motorcoach of extreme decrepitude and dirty grey colour rattled down state street, made a turn, and drew up at the curb beside me. i felt immediately that it was the right one; a guess which the halfillegible sign on the windshield arkhaminnsmouthnewburyport soon verified. there were only three passengers dark, unkempt men of sullen visage and somewhat youthful cast and when the vehicle stopped they clumsily shambled out and began walking up state street in a silent, almost furtive fashion. the driver also alighted, and i watched him as he went into the drug store to make some purchase. this, i reflected, must be the joe sargent mentioned by the ticketagent; and even before i noticed any details there spread over me a wave of spontaneous aversion which could be neither checked nor explained. it suddenly struck me as very natural that the local people should not wish to ride on a bus owned and driven by this man, or to visit any oftener than possible the habitat of such a man and his kinsfolk. when the driver came out of the store i looked at him more carefully and tried to determine the source of my evil impression. he was a thin, stoopshouldered man not much under six feet tall, dressed in shabby blue civilian clothes and wearing a frayed golf cap. his age was perhaps thirtyfive, but the odd, deep creases in the sides of his neck made him seem older when one did not study his dull, expressionless face. he had a narrow head, bulging, wateryblue eyes that seemed never to wink, a flat nose, a receding forehead and chin, and singularly undeveloped ears. his long thick lip and coarsepored, greyish cheeks seemed almost beardless except for some sparse yellow hairs that straggled and curled in irregular patches; and in places the surface seemed queerly irregular, as if peeling from some cutaneous disease. his hands were large and heavily veined, and had a very unusual greyishblue tinge. the fingers were strikingly short in proportion to the rest of the structure, and seemed to have a tendency to curl closely into the huge palm. as he walked toward the bus i observed his peculiarly shambling gait and saw that his feet were inordinately immense. the more i studied them the more i wondered how he could buy any shoes to fit them. a certain greasiness about the fellow increased my dislike. he was evidently given to working or lounging around the fish docks, and carried with him much of their characteristic smell. just what foreign blood was in him i could not even guess. his oddities certainly did not look asiatic, polynesian, levantine or negroid, yet i could see why the people found him alien. i myself would have thought of biological degeneration rather than alienage. i was sorry when i saw there would be no other passengers on the bus. somehow i did not like the idea of riding alone with this driver. but as leaving time obviously approached i conquered my qualms and followed the man aboard, extending him a dollar bill and murmuring the single word innsmouth. he looked curiously at me for a second as he returned forty cents change without speaking. i took a seat far behind him, but on the same side of the bus, since i wished to watch the shore during the journey. at length the decrepit vehicle stared with a jerk, and rattled noisily past the old brick buildings of state street amidst a cloud of vapour from the exhaust. glancing at the people on the sidewalks, i thought i detected in them a curious wish to avoid looking at the bus or at least a wish to avoid seeming to look at it. then we turned to the left into high street, where the going was smoother; flying by stately old mansions of the early republic and still older colonial farmhouses, passing the lower green and parker river, and finally emerging into a long, monotonous stretch of open shore country. the day was warm and sunny, but the landscape of sand and sedgegrass, and stunted shrubbery became more and desolate as we proceeded. out the window i could see the blue water and the sandy line of plum island, and we presently drew very near the beach as our narrow road veered off from the main highway to rowley and ipswich. there were no visible houses, and i could tell by the state of the road that traffic was very light hereabouts. the weatherworn telephone poles carried only two wires. now and then we crossed crude wooden bridges over tidal creeks that wound far inland and promoted the general isolation of the region. at last we lost sight of plum island and saw the vast expanse of the open atlantic on our left. our narrow course began to climb steeply, and i felt a singular sense of disquiet in looking at the lonely crest ahead where the rutted roadway met the sky. it was as if the bus were about to keep on in its ascent, leaving the sane earth altogether and merging with the unknown arcana of upper air and cryptical sky. the smell of the sea took on ominous implications, and the silent drivers bent, rigid back and narrow head became more and more hateful. as i looked at him i saw that the back of his head was almost as hairless as his face, having only a few straggling yellow strands upon a grey scabrous surface. then we reached the crest and beheld the outspread valley beyond, where the manuxet joins the sea just north of the long line of cliffs that culminate in kingsport head and veer off toward cape ann. on the far misty horizon i could just make out the dizzy profile of the head, topped by the queer ancient house of which so many legends are told; but for the moment all my attention was captured by the nearer panorama just below me. i had, i realized, come face to face with rumourshadowed innsmouth. it was a town of wide extent and dense construction, yet one with a portentous dearth of visible life. from the tangle of chimneypots scarcely a wisp of smoke came, and the three tall steeples loomed stark and unpainted against the seaward horizon. one of them was crumbling down at the top, and in that and another there were only black gaping holes where clockdials should have been. the vast huddle of sagging gambrel roofs and peaked gables conveyed with offensive clearness the idea of wormy decay, and as we approached along the now descending road i could see that many roofs had wholly caved in. there were some large square georgian houses, too, with hipped roofs, cupolas, and railed widows walks. these were mostly well back from the water, and one or two seemed to be in moderately sound condition. stretching inland from among them i saw the rusted, grassgrown line of the abandoned railway, with leaning telegraphpoles now devoid of wires, and the halfobscured lines of the old carriage roads to rowley and ipswich. the decay was worst close to the waterfront, though in its very midst i could spy the white belfry of a fairly well preserved brick structure which looked like a small factory. the harbour, long clogged with sand, was enclosed by an ancient stone breakwater; on which i could begin to discern the minute forms of a few seated fishermen, and at whose end were what looked like the foundations of a bygone lighthouse. a sandy tongue had formed inside this barrier and upon it i saw a few decrepit cabins, moored dories, and scattered lobsterpots. the only deep water seemed to be where the river poured out past the belfried structure and turned southward to join the ocean at the breakwaters end. here and there the ruins of wharves jutted out from the shore to end in indeterminate rottenness, those farthest south seeming the most decayed. and far out at sea, despite a high tide, i glimpsed a long, black line scarcely rising above the water yet carrying a suggestion of odd latent malignancy. this, i knew, must be devil reef. as i looked, a subtle, curious sense of beckoning seemed superadded to the grim repulsion; and oddly enough, i found this overtone more disturbing than the primary impression. we met no one on the road, but presently began to pass deserted farms in varying stages of ruin. then i noticed a few inhabited houses with rags stuffed in the broken windows and shells and dead fish lying about the littered yards. once or twice i saw listlesslooking people working in barren gardens or digging clams on the fishysmelling beach below, and groups of dirty, simianvisaged children playing around weedgrown doorsteps. somehow these people seemed more disquieting than the dismal buildings, for almost every one had certain peculiarities of face and motions which i instinctively disliked without being able to define or comprehend them. for a second i thought this typical physique suggested some picture i had seen, perhaps in a book, under circumstances of particular horror or melancholy; but this pseudorecollection passed very quickly. as the bus reached a lower level i began to catch the steady note of a waterfall through the unnatural stillness, the leaning, unpainted houses grew thicker, lined both sides of the road, and displayed more urban tendencies than did those we were leaving behind, the panorama ahead had contracted to a street scene, and in spots i could see where a cobblestone pavement and stretches of brick sidewalk had formerly existed. all the houses were apparently deserted, and there were occasional gaps where tumbledown chimneys and cellar walls told of buildings that had collapsed. pervading everything was the most nauseous fishy odour imaginable. but i was not to reach my destination without one very strong impression of poignantly disagreeable quality. the bus had come to a sort of open concourse or radial point with churches on two sides and the bedraggled remains of a circular green in the centre, and i was looking at a large pillared hall on the righthand junction ahead. the structures once white paint was now gray and peeling and the black and gold sign on the pediment was so faded that i could only with difficulty make out the words esoteric order of dagon. this, then was the former masonic hall now given over to a degraded cult. as i strained to decipher this inscription my notice was distracted by the raucous tones of a cracked bell across the street, and i quickly turned to look out the window on my side of the coach. the sound came from a squat stone church of manifestly later date than most of the houses, built in a clumsy gothic fashion and having a disproportionately high basement with shuttered windows. though the hands of its clock were missing on the side i glimpsed, i knew that those hoarse strokes were tolling the hour of eleven. then suddenly all thoughts of time were blotted out by an onrushing image of sharp intensity and unaccountable horror which had seized me before i knew what it really was. the door of the church basement was open, revealing a rectangle of blackness inside. and as i looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross that dark rectangle; burning into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was all the more maddening because analysis could not shew a single nightmarish quality in it. it was a living object the first except the driver that i had seen since entering the compact part of the town and had i been in a steadier mood i would have found nothing whatever of terror in it. clearly, as i realised a moment later, it was the pastor; clad in some peculiar vestments doubtless introduced since the order of dagon had modified the ritual of the local churches. the thing which had probably caught my first subconscious glance and supplied the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore; an almost exact duplicate of the one miss tilton had shown me the previous evening. this, acting on my imagination, had supplied namelessly sinister qualities to the indeterminate face and robed, shambling form beneath it. there was not, i soon decided, any reason why i should have felt that shuddering touch of evil pseudomemory. was it not natural that a local mystery cult should adopt among its regimentals an unique type of headdress made familiar to the community in some strange way perhaps as treasuretrove? a very thin sprinkling of repellentlooking youngish people now became visible on the sidewalks lone individuals, and silent knots of two or three. the lower floors of the crumbling houses sometimes harboured small shops with dingy signs, and i noticed a parked truck or two as we rattled along. the sound of waterfalls became more and more distinct, and presently i saw a fairly deep rivergorge ahead, spanned by a wide, ironrailed highway bridge beyond which a large square opened out. as we clanked over the bridge i looked out on both sides and observed some factory buildings on the edge of the grassy bluff or part way down. the water far below was very abundant, and i could see two vigorous sets of falls upstream on my right and at least one downstream on my left. from this point the noise was quite deafening. then we rolled into the large semicircular square across the river and drew up on the righthand side in front of a tall, cupola crowned building with remnants of yellow paint and with a halfeffaced sign proclaiming it to be the gilman house. i was glad to get out of that bus, and at once proceeded to check my valise in the shabby hotel lobby. there was only one person in sight an elderly man without what i had come to call the innsmouth look and i decided not to ask him any of the questions which bothered me; remembering that odd things had been noticed in this hotel. instead, i strolled out on the square, from which the bus had already gone, and studied the scene minutely and appraisingly. for some reason or other i chose to make my first inquiries at the chain grocery, whose personnel was not likely to be native to innsmouth. i found a solitary boy of about seventeen in charge, and was pleased to note the brightness and affability which promised cheerful information. he seemed exceptionally eager to talk, and i soon gathered that he did not like the place, its fishy smell, or its furtive people. a word with any outsider was a relief to him. he hailed from arkham, boarded with a family who came from ipswich, and went back whenever he got a moment off. his family did not like him to work in innsmouth, but the chain had transferred him there and he did not wish to give up his job. there was, he said, no public library or chamber of commerce in innsmouth, but i could probably find my way about. the street i had come down was federal. west of that were the fine old residence streets broad, washington, lafayette, and adams and east of it were the shoreward slums. it was in these slums along main street that i would find the old georgian churches, but they were all long abandoned. it would be well not to make oneself too conspicuous in such neighbourhoods especially north of the river since the people were sullen and hostile. some strangers had even disappeared. certain spots were almost forbidden territory, as he had learned at considerable cost. one must not, for example, linger much around the marsh refinery, or around any of the still used churches, or around the pillared order of dagon hall at new church green. those churches were very odd all violently disavowed by their respective denominations elsewhere, and apparently using the queerest kind of ceremonials and clerical vestments. their creeds were heterodox and mysterious, involving hints of certain marvelous transformations leading to bodily immorality of a sort on this earth. the youths own pastor dr. wallace of asbury m. e. church in arkham had gravely urged him not to join any church in innsmouth. they were very fond of the water, and swam a great deal in both river and harbour. swimming races out to devil reef were very common, and everyone in sight seemed well able to share in this arduous sport. when one came to think of it, it was generally only rather young people who were seen about in public, and of these the oldest were apt to be the most taintedlooking. when exceptions did occur, they were mostly persons with no trace of aberrancy, like the old clerk at the hotel. one wondered what became of the bulk of the older folk, and whether the innsmouth look were not a strange and insidious diseasephenomenon which increased its hold as years advanced. only a very rare affliction, of course, could bring about such vast and radical anatomical changes in a single individual after maturity changes invoking osseous factors as basic as the shape of the skull but then, even this aspect was no more baffling and unheardof than the visible features of the malady as a whole. it would be hard, the youth implied, to form any real conclusions regarding such a matter; since one never came to know the natives personally no matter how long one might live in innsmouth. the youth was certain that many specimens even worse than the worst visible ones were kept locked indoors in some places. people sometimes heard the queerest kind of sounds. the tottering waterfront hovels north of the river were reputedly connected by hidden tunnels, being thus a veritable warren of unseen abnormalities. what kind of foreign blood if any these beings had, it was impossible to tell. they sometimes kept certain especially repulsive characters out of sight when government and others from the outside world came to town. after all, though, little useful data could be gained from him; since his stories were all insane, incomplete hints of impossible marvels and horrors which could have no source save in his own disordered fancy. nobody ever believed him, but the natives did not like him to drink and talk with strangers; and it was not always safe to be seen questioning him. it was probably from him that some of the wildest popular whispers and delusions were derived. several nonnative residents had reported monstrous glimpses from time to time, but between old zadoks tales and the malformed inhabitants it was no wonder such illusions were current. none of the nonnatives ever stayed out late at night, there being a widespread impression that it was not wise to do so. besides, the streets were loathsomely dark. as for business the abundance of fish was certainly almost uncanny, but the natives were taking less and less advantage of it. moreover, prices were falling and competition was growing. of course the towns real business was the refinery, whose commercial office was on the square only a few doors east of where we stood. old man marsh was never seen, but sometimes went to the works in a closed, curtained car. there were all sorts of rumors about how marsh had come to look. he had once been a great dandy; and people said he still wore the frockcoated finery of the edwardian age curiously adapted to certain deformities. his son had formerly conducted the office in the square, but latterly they had been keeping out of sight a good deal and leaving the brunt of affairs to the younger generation. the sons and their sisters had come to look very queer, especially the elder ones; and it was said that their health was failing. one of the marsh daughters was a repellent, reptilianlooking woman who wore an excess of weird jewellery clearly of the same exotic tradition as that to which the strange tiara belonged. my informant had noticed it many times, and had heard it spoken of as coming from some secret hoard, either of pirates or of demons. the clergymen or priests, or whatever they were called nowadays also wore this kind of ornament as a headdress; but one seldom caught glimpses of them. other specimens the youth had not seen, though many were rumoured to exist around innsmouth. the marshes, together with the other three gently bred families of the town the waites, the gilmans, and the eliots were all very retiring. they lived in immense houses along washington street, and several were reputed to harbour in concealment certain living kinsfolk whose personal aspect forbade public view, and whose deaths had been reported and recorded. warning me that many of the street signs were down, the youth drew for my benefit a rough but ample and painstaking sketch map of the towns salient features. after a moments study i felt sure that it would be of great help, and pocketed it with profuse thanks. disliking the dinginess of the single restaurant i had seen, i bought a fair supply of cheese crackers and ginger wafers to serve as a lunch later on. my program, i decided, would be to thread the principal streets, talk with any nonnatives i might encounter, and catch the eight oclock coach for arkham. the town, i could see, formed a significant and exaggerated example of communal decay; but being no sociologist i would limit my serious observations to the field of architecture. thus i began my systematic though halfbewildered tour of innsmouths narrow, shadowblighted ways. crossing the bridge and turning toward the roar of the lower falls, i passed close to the marsh refinery, which seemed to be oddly free from the noise of industry. the building stood on the steep river bluff near a bridge and an open confluence of streets which i took to be the earliest civic center, displaced after the revolution by the present town square. recrossing the gorge on the main street bridge, i struck a region of utter desertion which somehow made me shudder. collapsing huddles of gambrel roofs formed a jagged and fantastic skyline, above which rose the ghoulish, decapitated steeple of an ancient church. some houses along main street were tenanted, but most were tightly boarded up. down unpaved side streets i saw the black, gaping windows of deserted hovels, many of which leaned at perilous and incredible angles through the sinking of part of the foundations. those windows stared so spectrally that it took courage to turn eastward toward the waterfront. certainly, the terror of a deserted house swells in geometrical rather than arithmetical progression as houses multiply to form a city of stark desolation. the sight of such endless avenues of fishyeyed vacancy and death, and the thought of such linked infinities of black, brooding compartments given over to cobwebs and memories and the conqueror worm, start up vestigial fears and aversions that not even the stoutest philosophy can disperse. fish street was as deserted as main, though it differed in having many brick and stone warehouses still in excellent shape. water street was almost its duplicate, save that there were great seaward gaps where wharves had been. not a living thing did i see except for the scattered fishermen on the distant breakwater, and not a sound did i hear save the lapping of the harbour tides and the roar of the falls in the manuxet. the town was getting more and more on my nerves, and i looked behind me furtively as i picked my way back over the tottering water street bridge. the fish street bridge, according to the sketch, was in ruins. north of the river there were traces of squalid life active fishpacking houses in water street, smoking chimneys and patched roofs here and there, occasional sounds from indeterminate sources, and infrequent shambling forms in the dismal streets and unpaved lanes but i seemed to find this even more oppressive than the southerly desertion. for one thing, the people were more hideous and abnormal than those near the centre of the town; so that i was several times evilly reminded of something utterly fantastic which i could not quite place. undoubtedly the alien strain in the innsmouth folk was stronger here than farther inland unless, indeed, the innsmouth look were a disease rather than a blood stain, in which case this district might be held to harbour the more advanced cases. one detail that annoyed me was the distribution of the few faint sounds i heard. they ought naturally to have come wholly from the visibly inhabited houses, yet in reality were often strongest inside the most rigidly boardedup facades. there were creakings, scurryings, and hoarse doubtful noises; and i thought uncomfortably about the hidden tunnels suggested by the grocery boy. suddenly i found myself wondering what the voices of those denizens would be like. i had heard no speech so far in this quarter, and was unaccountably anxious not to do so. pausing only long enough to look at two fine but ruinous old churches at main and church streets, i hastened out of that vile waterfront slum. my next logical goal was new church green, but somehow or other i could not bear to repass the church in whose basement i had glimpsed the inexplicably frightening form of that strangely diademmed priest or pastor. besides, the grocery youth had told me that churches, as well as the order of dagon hall, were not advisable neighbourhoods for strangers. accordingly i kept north along main to martin, then turning inland, crossing federal street safely north of the green, and entering the decayed patrician neighbourhood of northern broad, washington, lafayette, and adams streets. though these stately old avenues were illsurfaced and unkempt, their elmshaded dignity had not entirely departed. mansion after mansion claimed my gaze, most of them decrepit and boarded up amidst neglected grounds, but one or two in each street shewing signs of occupancy. in washington street there was a row of four or five in excellent repair and with finelytended lawns and gardens. the most sumptuous of these with wide terraced parterres extending back the whole way to lafayette street i took to be the home of old man marsh, the afflicted refinery owner. in all these streets no living thing was visible, and i wondered at the complete absence of cats and dogs from innsmouth. another thing which puzzled and disturbed me, even in some of the bestpreserved mansions, was the tightly shuttered condition of many thirdstory and attic windows. furtiveness and secretiveness seemed universal in this hushed city of alienage and death, and i could not escape the sensation of being watched from ambush on every hand by sly, staring eyes that never shut. i shivered as the cracked stroke of three sounded from a belfry on my left. too well did i recall the squat church from which those notes came. following washington street toward the river, i now faced a new zone of former industry and commerce; noting the ruins of a factory ahead, and seeing others, with the traces of an old railway station and covered railway bridge beyond, up the gorge on my right. the uncertain bridge now before me was posted with a warning sign, but i took the risk and crossed again to the south bank where traces of life reappeared. furtive, shambling creatures stared cryptically in my direction, and more normal faces eyed me coldly and curiously. innsmouth was rapidly becoming intolerable, and i turned down paine street toward the square in the hope of getting some vehicle to take me to arkham before the stilldistant startingtime of that sinister bus. it was then that i saw the tumbledown fire station on my left, and noticed the red faced, bushybearded, watery eyed old man in nondescript rags who sat on a bench in front of it talking with a pair of unkempt but not abnormal looking firemen. this, of course, must be zadok allen, the halfcrazed, liquorish nonagenarian whose tales of old innsmouth and its shadow were so hideous and incredible. iii it must have been some imp of the perverse or some sardonic pull from dark, hidden sources which made me change my plans as i did. i had long before resolved to limit my observations to architecture alone, and i was even then hurrying toward the square in an effort to get quick transportation out of this festering city of death and decay; but the sight of old zadok allen set up new currents in my mind and made me slacken my pace uncertainly. i had been assured that the old man could do nothing but hint at wild, disjointed, and incredible legends, and i had been warned that the natives made it unsafe to be seen talking with him; yet the thought of this aged witness to the towns decay, with memories going back to the early days of ships and factories, was a lure that no amount of reason could make me resist. after all, the strangest and maddest of myths are often merely symbols or allegories based upon truth and old zadok must have seen everything which went on around innsmouth for the last ninety years. curiosity flared up beyond sense and caution, and in my youthful egotism i fancied i might be able to sift a nucleus of real history from the confused, extravagant outpouring i would probably extract with the aid of raw whiskey. i knew that i could not accost him then and there, for the firemen would surely notice and object. instead, i reflected, i would prepare by getting some bootleg liquor at a place where the grocery boy had told me it was plentiful. then i would loaf near the fire station in apparent casualness, and fall in with old zadok after he had started on one of his frequent rambles. the youth had said that he was very restless, seldom sitting around the station for more than an hour or two at a time. a quart bottle of whiskey was easily, though not cheaply, obtained in the rear of a dingy varietystore just off the square in eliot street. the dirtylooking fellow who waited on me had a touch of the staring innsmouth look, but was quite civil in his way; being perhaps used to the custom of such convivial strangers truckmen, goldbuyers, and the like as were occasionally in town. reentering the square i saw that luck was with me; for shuffling out of paine street around the corner of the gilman house i glimpsed nothing less than the tall, lean, tattered form of old zadok allen himself. in accordance with my plan, i attracted his attention by brandishing my newlypurchased bottle: and soon realised that he had begun to shuffle wistfully after me as i turned into waite street on my way to the most deserted region i could think of. i was steering my course by the map the grocery boy had prepared, and was aiming for the wholly abandoned stretch of southern waterfront which i had previously visited. the only people in sight there had been the fishermen on the distant breakwater; and by going a few squares south i could get beyond the range of these, finding a pair of seats on some abandoned wharf and being free to question old zadok unobserved for an indefinite time. before i reached main street i could hear a faint and wheezy hey, mister! behind me and i presently allowed the old man to catch up and take copious pulls from the quart bottle. i began putting out feelers as we walked amidst the omnipresent desolation and crazily tilted ruins, but found that the aged tongue did not loosen as quickly as i had expected. at length i saw a grassgrown opening toward the sea between crumbling brick walls, with the weedy length of an earthandmasonry wharf projecting beyond. piles of mosscovered stones near the water promised tolerable seats, and the scene was sheltered from all possible view by a ruined warehouse on the north. here, i thought was the ideal place for a long secret colloquy; so i guided my companion down the lane and picked out spots to sit in among the mossy stones. the air of death and desertion was ghoulish, and the smell of fish almost insufferable; but i was resolved to let nothing deter me. about four hours remained for conversation if i were to catch the eight oclock coach for arkham, and i began to dole out more liquor to the ancient tippler; meanwhile eating my own frugal lunch. in my donations i was careful not to overshoot the mark, for i did not wish zadoks vinous garrulousness to pass into a stupor. after an hour his furtive taciturnity shewed signs of disappearing, but much to my disappointment he still sidetracked my questions about innsmouth and its shadowhaunted past. he would babble of current topics, revealing a wide acquaintance with newspapers and a great tendency to philosophise in a sententious village fashion. toward the end of the second hour i feared my quart of whiskey would not be enough to produce results, and was wondering whether i had better leave old zadok and go back for more. just then, however, chance made the opening which my questions had been unable to make; and the wheezing ancients rambling took a turn that caused me to lean forward and listen alertly. my back was toward the fishysmelling sea, but he was facing it and something or other had caused his wandering gaze to light on the low, distant line of devil reef, then showing plainly and almost fascinatingly above the waves. the sight seemed to displease him, for he began a series of weak curses which ended in a confidential whisper and a knowing leer. he bent toward me, took hold of my coat lapel, and hissed out some hints that could not be mistaken, thars whar it all begun that cursed place of all wickedness whar the deep water starts. gate o hell sheer drop daown to a bottom no saoundinline kin tech. ol capn obed done it him that faound aout moren was good fer him in the saouth sea islands. never was nobody like capn obed old limb o satan! heh, heh! i kin mind him atellin abaout furren parts, an callin all the folks stupid for goin to christian meetin an bearin their burdns meek an lowly. says theyd orter git better gods like some o the folks in the injies gods as ud bring em good fishin in return for their sacrifices, an ud reely answer folkss prayers. matt eliot his fust mate, talked a lot too, only he was again folkss doin any heathen things. told abaout an island east of othaheite whar they was a lot o stone ruins oldern anybody knew anying abaout, kind o like them on ponape, in the carolines, but with carvens of faces that looked like the big statues on easter island. thar was a little volcanic island near thar, too, whar they was other ruins with diffrent carvin ruins all wore away like theyd ben under the sea onct, an with picters of awful monsters all over em. wal, sir, matt he says the natives anound thar had all the fish they cud ketch, an sported bracelets an armlets an head rigs made aout o a queer kind o gold an covered with picters o monsters jest like the ones carved over the ruins on the little island sorter fishlike frogs or froglike fishes that was drawed in all kinds o positions likes they was human beins. nobody cud get aout o them whar they got all the stuff, an all the other natives wondered haow they managed to find fish in plenty even when the very next island had lean pickins. matt he got to wonderon too an so did capn obed. obed he notices, besides, that lots of the hnsome young folks ud drop aout o sight fer good from year to year, an that they want many old folks around. also, he thinks some of the folks looked dinned queer even for kanakys. it took obed to git the truth aout o them heathen. i dunt know haow he done it, but be begun by tradin fer the goldlike things they wore. ast em whar they come from, an ef they cud git more, an finally wormed the story aout o the old chief walakea, they called him. nobody but obed ud ever a believed the old yeller devil, but the capn cud read folks like they was books. heh, heh! nobody never believes me naow when i tell em, an i dunt spose you will, young feller though come to look at ye, ye hev kind o got them sharpreadin eyes like obed had. the old mans whisper grew fainter, and i found myself shuddering at the terrible and sincere portentousness of his intonation, even though i knew his tale could be nothing but drunken phantasy. wal, sir, obed he lart that theys things on this arth as most folks never heerd about an wouldnt believe ef they did hear. lt seems these kanakys was sacrificin heaps o their young men an maidens to some kind o godthings that lived under the sea, an gittin all kinds o favour in return. they met the things on the little islet with the queer ruins, an it seems them awful picters o frogfish monsters was supposed to be picters o these things. mebbe they was the kind o critters as got all the mermaid stories an sech started. they had all kinds a cities on the seabottom, an this island was heaved up from thar. seem they was some of the things alive in the stone buildins when the island come up sudden to the surface, thats how the kanakys got wind they was daown thar. made signtalk as soon as they got over bein skeert, an pieced up a bargain afore long. them things liked human sacrifices. had had em ages afore, but lost track o the upper world after a time. what they done to the victims it aint fer me to say, an i guess obed wasnt none too sharp abaout askin. but it was all right with the heathens, because theyd ben havin a hard time an was desprate abaout everything. they give a sarten number o young folks to the seathings twice every year mayeve an hallaween reglar as cud be. also give some a the carved knickknacks they made. what the things agreed to give in return was plenty a fish they druv em in from all over the sea an a few gold like things naow an then. wal, as i says, the natives met the things on the little volcanic islet goin thar in canoes with the sacrifices et cetry, and bringin back any of the goldlike jools as was comin to em. at fust the things didnt never go onto the main island, but arter a time they come to want to. seems they hankered arter mixin with the folks, an havin jint ceremonies on the big days mayeve an halloween. ye see, they was able to live both in ant aout o water what they call amphibians, i guess. the kanakys told em as haow folks from the other islands might wanta wipe an out if they got wind o their bein thar, but they says they dunt keer much, because they cud wipe aout the hull brood o humans ef they was willin to bother that is, any as didnt be, sarten signs sech as was used onct by the lost old ones, whoever they was. but not wantin to bother, theyd lay low when anybody visited the island. when it come to matin with them toadlookin fishes, the kanakys kind o balked, but finally they larnt something as put a new face on the matter. seems that human folks has got a kind a relation to sech waterbeasts that everything alive come aout o the water onct an only needs a little change to go back agin. them things told the kanakys that ef they mixed bloods thered be children as ud look human at fust, but later turn moren more like the things, till finally theyd take to the water an jine the main lot o things daown har. an this is the important part, young feller them as turned into fish things an went into the water wouldnt never die. them things never died excep they was kilt violent. wal, sir, it seems by the time obed knowed them islanders they was all full o fish blood from them deep water things. when they got old an begun to shew it, they was kep hid until they felt like takin to the water an quittin the place. some was more teched than others, an some never did change quite enough to take to the water; but mosily they turned out jest the way them things said. them as was born more like the things changed arly, but them as was nearly human sometimes stayed on the island till they was past seventy, though theyd usually go daown under for trial trips afore that. folks as had took to the water genrally come back a good deal to visit, sos a man ud often be atalkin to his own fivetimesgreatgrandfather whod left the dry land a couple o hundred years or so afore. everybody got aout o the idee o dyin excep in canoe wars with the other islanders, or as sacrifices to the seagods daown below, or from snakebite or plague or sharp gallopin ailments or somethin afore they cud take to the water but simply looked forrad to a kind o change that want a bit horrible artet a while. they thought what theyd got was well wuth all theyd had to give up an i guess obed kind o come to think the same hisself when hed chewed over old walakeas story a bit. walakea, though, was one of the few as hadnt got none of the fish blood bein of a royal line that intermarried with royal lines on other islands. walakea he shewed obed a lot o rites an incantations as had to do with the sea things, an let him see some o the folks in the village as had changed a lot from human shape. somehaow or other, though, he never would let him see one of the reglar things from right aout o the water. in the end he give him a funny kind o thingumajig made aout o lead or something, that he said ud bring up the fish things from any place in the water whar they might be a nest o em. the idee was to drop it daown with the right kind o prayers an sech. walakea allowed as the things was scattered all over the world, sos anybody that looked abaout cud find a nest an bring em up ef they was wanted. matt he didnt like this business at all, an wanted obed shud keep away from the island; but the capn was sharp fer gain, an faound he cud get them goldlike things so cheap it ud pay him to make a specialty of them. things went on that way for years an obed got enough o that goldlike stuff to make him start the refinery in waites old rundaown fullin mill. he didnt dass sell the pieces like they was, for folks ud be all the time askin questions. all the same his crews ud get a piece an dispose of it naow and then, even though they was swore to keep quiet; an he let his womenfolks wear some o the pieces as was more humanlike than most. well, come abaout thuttyeight when i was seven year old obed he faound the island people all wiped aout between vyages. seems the other islanders had got wind o what was goin on, and had took matters into their own hands. spose they must a had, after all, them old magic signs as the sea things says was the only things they was afeard of. no tellin what any o them kanakys will chance to git a holt of when the seabottom throws up some island with ruins oldern the deluge. pious cusses, these was they didnt leave nothin standin on either the main island or the little volcanic islet excep what parts of the ruins was too big to knock daown. in some places they was little stones strewed abaout like charms with somethin on em like what ye call a swastika naowadays. probly them was the old ones signs. folks all wiped aout no trace o no goldlike things an none the nearby kanakys ud breathe a word abaout the matter. wouldnt even admit theyd ever ben any people on that island. that naturally hit obed pretty hard, seein as his normal trade was doin very poor. it hit the whole of innsmouth, too, because in seafarint days what profited the master of a ship genlly profited the crew proportionate. most of the folks araound the taown took the hard times kind o sheeplike an resigned, but they was in bad shape because the fishin was peterin aout an the mills want doin none too well. here the old man faltered, mumbled, and lapsed into a moody and apprehensive silence; glancing nervously over his shoulder and then turning back to stare fascinatedly at the distant black reef. when i spoke to him he did not answer, so i knew i would have to let him finish the bottle. the insane yarn i was hearing interested me profoundly, for i fancied there was contained within it a sort of crude allegory based upon the strangeness of innsmouth and elaborated by an imagination at once creative and full of scraps of exotic legend. not for a moment did i believe that the tale had any really substantial foundation; but none the less the account held a hint of genuine terror if only because it brought in references to strange jewels clearly akin to the malign tiara i had seen at newburyport. perhaps the ornaments had, after all, come from some strange island; and possibly the wild stories were lies of the bygone obed himself rather than of this antique toper. i handed zadok the bottle, and he drained it to the last drop. it was curious how he could stand so much whiskey, for not even a trace of thickness had come into his high, wheezy voice. he licked the nose of the bottle and slipped it into his pocket, then beginning to nod and whisper softly to himself. i bent close to catch any articulate words he might utter, and thought i saw a sardonic smile behind the stained bushy whiskers. yes he was really forming words, and i could grasp a fair proportion of them. he stopped again, and from the look in his watery blue eyes i feared he was close to a stupor after all. but when i gently shook his shoulder he turned on me with astonishing alertness and snapped out some more obscure phrases. dunt believe me, hey? hey, heh, heh then jest tell me, young feller, why capn obed an twenty odd other folks used to row aout to devil reef in the dead o night an chant things so laoud ye cud hear em all over taown when the wind was right? tell me that, hey? an tell me why obed was allus droppin heavy things daown into the deep water tother side o the reef whar the bottom shoots daown like a cliff lowern ye kin saound? tell me what he done with that funnyshaped lead thingumajig as walakea give him? hey, boy? an what did they all haowl on mayeve, an, agin the next halloween? an whyd the new church parsons fellers as used to he sailors wear them queer robes an cover theirselves with them goldlike things obed brung? hey? the watery blue eyes were almost savage and maniacal now, and the dirty white beard bristled electrically. old zadok probably saw me shrink back, for he began to cackle evilly. heh, heh, heh, heh! beginnin to see hey? mebbe yed like to a ben me in them days, when i seed things at night aout to sea from the cupalo top o my haouse. oh, i kin tell ye little pitchers hev big ears, an i want missin nothin o what was gossiped abaout capn obed an the folks aout to the reef! heh, heh, heh! haow abaout the night i took my pas ships glass up to the cupalo an seed the reef abristlin thick with shapes that dove off quick soons the moon riz? obed an the folks was in a dory, but them shapes dove off the far side into the deep water an never come up ... haowd ye like to be a little shaver alone up in a cupola awatchin shapes as want human shapes? ...heh? ... heh, heh, heh ... the old man was getting hysterical, and i began to shiver with a nameless alarm. he laid a gnarled claw on my shoulder, and it seemed to me that its shaking was not altogether that of mirth. spose one night ye seed somethin heavy heaved offen obeds dory beyond the reef and then learned next day a young feller was missin from home. hey! did anybody ever see hide or hair o hiram gilman agin. did they? an nick pierce, an luelly waite, an adoniram saouthwick, an henry garrison hey? heh, heh, heh, heh ... shapes talkin sign language with their hands ... them as had reel hands ... remember, i aint sayin obed was set on hevin things jest like they was on that kanaky isle. i dunt think he aimed at fust to do no mixin, nor raise no younguns to take to the water an turn into fishes with eternal life. he wanted them gold things, an was willin to pay heavy, an i guess the others was satisfied fer a while ... come in fortysix the taown done some lookin an thinkin fer itself. too many folks missin too much wild preachin at meetin of a sunday too much talk abaout that reef. i guess i done a bit by tellin selectman mowry what i see from the cupalo. they was a party one night as follered obeds craowd aout to the reef, an i heerd shots betwixt the dories. nex day obed and thuttytwo others was in gaol, with everybody awonderin jest what was afoot and jest what charge agin em cud he got to holt. god, ef anybodyd lookd ahead ... a couple o weeks later, when nothin had ben throwed into the sea fer thet long ... zadok was shewing sings of fright and exhaustion, and i let him keep silence for a while, though glancing apprehensively at my watch. the tide had turned and was coming in now, and the sound of the waves seemed to arouse him. i was glad of that tide, for at high water the fishy smell might not be so bad. again i strained to catch his whispers. that awful night ... i seed em. i was up in the cupalo ... hordes of em ... swarms of em ... all over the reef an swimmin up the harbour into the manuxet ... god, what happened in the streets of innsmouth that night ... they rattled our door, but pa wouldnt open ... then he clumb aout the kitchen winder with his musket to find selecman mowry an see what he cud do ... maounds o the dead an the dyin ... shots and screams ... shaoutin in ol squar an taown squar an new church green gaol throwed open ... proclamation ... treason ... called it the plague when folks come in an faoud haff our people missin ... nobody left but them as ud jine in with obed an them things or else keep quiet ... never heard o my pa no more... the old man was panting and perspiring profusely. his grip on my shoulder tightened. everything cleaned up in the mornin but they was traces ... obed he kinder takes charge an says things is goin to be changed ... othersll worship with us at meetintime, an sarten haouses hez got to entertin guests ... they wanted to mix like they done with the kanakys, an he for one didnt feel baound to stop em. far gone, was obed ... jest like a crazy man on the subjeck. he says they brung us fish an treasure, an shud hev what they hankered after ... nothin was to be diffrunt on the aoutsid; only we was to keep shy o strangers ef we knowed what was good fer us. we all hed to take the oath o dagon, an later on they was secon an third oaths that some o us took. them as ud help special, ud git special rewards gold an sech no use balkin, fer they was millions of em daown thar. theyd ruther not start risin an wipin aout humankind, but ef they was gave away an forced to, they cud do a lot toward jest that. we didnt hev them old charms to cut em off like folks in the saouth sea did, an them kanakys wudut never give away their secrets. old zadok was fast lapsing into stark raving, and i held my breath. poor old soul to what pitiful depths of hallucination had his liquor, plus his hatred of the decay, alienage, and disease around him, brought that fertile, imaginative brain? he began to moan now, and tears were coursing down his channelled checks into the depths of his beard. god, what i seen senct i was fifteen year old mene, mene, tekel, upharsin! the folks as was missin, and them as kilt theirselves them as told things in arkham or ipswich or sech places was all called crazy, like youre callin me right naow but god, what i seen theyd a kilt me long ago fer what i know, only id took the fust an secon oaths o dago offen obed, so was pertected unlessen a jury of em proved i told things knowin an delibrit ... but i wudnt take the third oath id a died ruthern take that it got wuss araound civil war time, when children born senct fortysix begun to grow up some em, that is. i was afeared never did no pryin arter that awful night, an never see one o them clost to in all my life. that is, never no fullblooded one. i went to the war, an ef id a had any guts or sense id a never come back, but settled away from here. but folks wrote me things want so bad. that, i spose, was because govmunt draft men was in taown arter sixtythree. arter the war it was jest as bad agin. people begun to fall off mills an shops shet daown shippin stopped an the harbour choked up railrud give up but they ... they never stopped swimmin in an aout o the river from that cursed reef o satan an more an more attic winders got aboarded up, an more an more noises was heerd in haouses as want sposed to hev nobody in em... folks aoutside hev their stories abaout us spose youve heerd a plenty on em, seein what questions ye ast stories abaout things theyve seed naow an then, an abaout that queer joolry as still comes in from somewhars an aint quite all melted up but nothin never gits defnite. nobodyll believe nothin. they call them goldlike things pirate loot, an allaow the innsmouth folks hez furren blood or is distempered or somethin. beside, them that lives here shoo off as many strangers as they kin, an encourage the rest not to git very curous, specially raound night time. beasts balk at the critters hosses wussn mules but when they got autos that was all right. in fortysix capn obed took a second wife that nobody in the taown never see some says he didnt want to, but was made to by them as hed called in had three children by her two as disappeared young, but one gal as looked like anybody else an was eddicated in europe. obed finally got her married off by a trick to an arkham feller as didnt suspect nothin. but nobody aoutsidell hav nothin to do with innsmouth folks naow. barnabas marsh that runs the refinry now is obeds grandson by his fust wife son of onesiphorus, his eldest son, but his mother was another o them as want never seen aoutdoors. right naow barnabas is abaout changed. cant shet his eyes no more, an is all aout o shape. they say he still wears clothes, but hell take to the water soon. mebbe hes tried it already they do sometimes go daown for little spells afore they go daown for good. aint ben seed abaout in public fer nigh on ten year. dunt know haow his poor wife kin feel she come from ipiwich, an they nigh lynched barnabas when he courted her fifty odd year ago. obed he died in seventyeight an all the next genration is gone naow the fust wifes children dead, and the rest ... god knows ... the sound of the incoming tide was now very insistent, and little by little it seemed to change the old mans mood from maudlin tearfulness to watchful fear. he would pause now and then to renew those nervous glances over his shoulder or out toward the reef, and despite the wild absurdity of his tale, i could not help beginning to share his apprehensiveness. zadok now grew shriller, seemed to be trying to whip up his courage with louder speech. zadok was really screaming now, and the mad frenzy of his voice disturbed me more than i care to own. curse ye, dunt set thar astarin at me with them eyes i tell obed marsh hes in hell, an, hez got to stay thar! heh, heh ... in hell, i says! cant git me i haint done nothin nor told nobody nothin oh, you, young feller? wal, even ef i haint told nobody nothin yet, im agoin to naow! yew jest set still an listen to me, boy this is what i aint never told nobody... i says i didnt get to do pryin arter that night but i faound things about jest the same! yew want to know what the reel horror is, hey? wal, its this it aint what them fish devils hez done, but what theyre agoin to do! theyre abringin things up aout o whar they come from into the taown been doin it fer years, an slackenin up lately. them haouses north o the river betwixt water an main streets is full of em them devils an what they brung an when they git ready ... i say, when they git... ever hear tell of a shoggoth? hey, dye hear me? i tell ye i know what them things be i seen em one night when ... ehahhhah! eyahhh ... the hideous suddenness and inhuman frightfulness of the old mans shriek almost made me faint. his eyes, looking past me toward the malodorous sea, were positively starting from his head; while his face was a mask of fear worthy of greek tragedy. his bony claw dug monstrously into my shoulder, and he made no motion as i turned my head to look at whatever he had glimpsed. there was nothing that i could see. only the incoming tide, with perhaps one set of ripples more local than the longflung line of breakers. but now zadok was shaking me, and i turned back to watch the melting of that fearfrozen face into a chaos of twitching eyelids and mumbling gums. presently his voice came back albeit as a trembling whisper. git aout o here! get aout o here! they seen us git aout fer your life! dunt wait fer nothin they know naow run fer it quick aout o this taown another heavy wave dashed against the loosing masonry of the bygone wharf, and changed the mad ancients whisper to another inhuman and bloodcurdling scream. eyaahhhh! ... yheaaaaaa!... before i could recover my scattered wits he had relaxed his clutch on my shoulder and dashed wildly inland toward the street, reeling northward around the ruined warehouse wall. i glanced back at the sea, but there was nothing there. and when i reached water street and looked along it toward the north there was no remaining trace of zadok allen. iv i can hardly describe the mood in which i was left by this harrowing episode an episode at once mad and pitiful, grotesque and terrifying. the grocery boy had prepared me for it, yet the reality left me none the less bewildered and disturbed. puerile though the story was, old zadoks insane earnestness and horror had communicated to me a mounting unrest which joined with my earlier sense of loathing for the town and its blight of intangible shadow. though the golden light of late afternoon gave the ancient roofs and decrepit chimneys an air of mystic loveliness and peace, i could not help glancing over my shoulder now and then. i would surely be very glad to get out of malodorous and fearshadowed innsmouth, and wished there were some other vehicle than the bus driven by that sinisterlooking fellow sargent. yet i did not hurry too precipitately, for there were architectural details worth viewing at every silent corner; and i could easily, i calculated, cover the necessary distance in a halfhour. studying the grocery youths map and seeking a route i had not traversed before, i chose marsh street instead of state for my approach to town square. near the corner of fall street i began to see scattered groups of furtive whisperers, and when i finally reached the square i saw that almost all the loiterers were congregated around the door of the gilman house. it seemed as if many bulging, watery, unwinking eyes looked oddly at me as i claimed my valise in the lobby, and i hoped that none of these unpleasant creatures would be my fellowpassengers on the coach. the bus, rather early, rattled in with three passengers somewhat before eight, and an evillooking fellow on the sidewalk muttered a few indistinguishable words to the driver. sargent threw out a mailbag and a roll of newspapers, and entered the hotel; while the passengers the same men whom i had seen arriving in newburyport that morning shambled to the sidewalk and exchanged some faint guttural words with a loafer in a language i could have sworn was not english. i boarded the empty coach and took the seat i had taken before, but was hardly settled before sargent reappeared and began mumbling in a throaty voice of peculiar repulsiveness. despite what i had heard of this hotel in newburyport, i signed the register, paid my dollar, let the clerk take my valise, and followed that sour, solitary attendant up three creaking flights of stairs past dusty corridors which seemed wholly devoid of life. my room was a dismal rear one with two windows and bare, cheap furnishings, overlooked a dingy courtyard otherwise hemmed in by low, deserted brick blocks, and commanded a view of decrepit westwardstretching roofs with a marshy countryside beyond. at the end of the corridor was a bathroom a discouraging relique with ancient marble bowl, tin tub, faint electric light, and musty wooded paneling around all the plumbing fixtures. it being still daylight, i descended to the square and looked around for a dinner of some sort; noticing as i did so the strange glances i received from the unwholesome loafers. since the grocery was closed, i was forced to patronise the restaurant i had shunned before; a stooped, narrowheaded man with staring, unwinking eyes, and a flatnosed wench with unbelievably thick, clumsy hands being in attendance. the service was all of the counter type, and it relieved me to find that much was evidently served from cans and packages. a bowl of vegetable soup with crackers was enough for me, and i soon headed back for my cheerless room at the gilman; getting a evening paper and a flyspecked magazine from the evilvisaged clerk at the rickety stand beside his desk. as twilight deepened i turned on the one feeble electric bulb over the cheap, ironframed bed, and tried as best i could to continue the reading i had begun. i felt it advisable to keep my mind wholesomely occupied, for it would not do to brood over the abnormalities of this ancient, blightshadowed town while i was still within its borders. the insane yarn i had heard from the aged drunkard did not promise very pleasant dreams, and i felt i must keep the image of his wild, watery eyes as far as possible from my imagination. also, i must not dwell on what that factory inspector had told the newburyport ticketagent about the gilman house and the voices of its nocturnal tenants not on that, nor on the face beneath the tiara in the black church doorway; the face for whose horror my conscious mind could not account. it would perhaps have been easier to keep my thoughts from disturbing topics had the room not been so gruesomely musty. as it was, the lethal mustiness blended hideously with the towns general fishy odour and persistently focussed ones fancy on death and decay. another thing that disturbed me was the absence of a bolt on the door of my room. one had been there, as marks clearly shewed, but there were signs of recent removal. no doubt it had been out of order, like so many other things in this decrepit edifice. in my nervousness i looked around and discovered a bolt on the clothes press which seemed to be of the same size, judging from the marks, as the one formerly on the door. to gain a partial relief from the general tension i busied myself by transferring this hardware to the vacant place with the aid of a handy threeinone device including a screwdriver which i kept on my keyring. the bolt fitted perfectly, and i was somewhat relieved when i knew that i could shoot it firmly upon retiring. not that i had any real apprehension of its need, but that any symbol of security was welcome in an environment of this kind. there were adequate bolts on the two lateral doors to connecting rooms, and these i proceeded to fasten. i did not undress, but decided to read till i was sleepy and then lie down with only my coat, collar, and shoes off. taking a pocket flash light from my valise, i placed it in my trousers, so that i could read my watch if i woke up later in the dark. drowsiness, however, did not come; and when i stopped to analyse my thoughts i found to my disquiet that i was really unconsciously listening for something listening for something which i dreaded but could not name. that inspectors story must have worked on my imagination more deeply than i had suspected. again i tried to read, but found that i made no progress. after a time i seemed to hear the stairs and corridors creak at intervals as if with footsteps, and wondered if the other rooms were beginning to fill up. there were no voices, however, and it struck me that there was something subtly furtive about the creaking. i did not like it, and debated whether i had better try to sleep at all. this town had some queer people, and there had undoubtedly been several disappearances. was this one of those inns where travelers were slain for their money? surely i had no look of excessive prosperity. or were the towns folk really so resentful about curious visitors? had my obvious sightseeing, with its frequent mapconsultations, aroused unfavorable notice. it occurred to me that i must be in a highly nervous state to let a few random creakings set me off speculating in this fashion but i regretted none the less that i was unarmed. at length, feeling a fatigue which had nothing of drowsiness in it, i bolted the newly outfitted hall door, turned off the light, and threw myself down on the hard, uneven bed coat, collar, shoes, and all. in the darkness every faint noise of the night seemed magnified, and a flood of doubly unpleasant thoughts swept over me. i was sorry i had put out the light, yet was too tired to rise and turn it on again. then, after a long, dreary interval, and prefaced by a fresh creaking of stairs and corridor, there came that soft, damnably unmistakable sound which seemed like a malign fulfillment of all my apprehensions. without the least shadow of a doubt, the lock of my door was being tried cautiously, furtively, tentatively with a key. my sensations upon recognising this sign of actual peril were perhaps less rather than more tumultuous because of my previous vague fears. i had been, albeit without definite reason, instinctively on my guard and that was to my advantage in the new and real crisis, whatever it might turn out to be. nevertheless the change in the menace from vague premonition to immediate reality was a profound shock, and fell upon me with the force of a genuine blow. it never once occurred to me that the fumbling might be a mere mistake. malign purpose was all i could think of, and i kept deathly quiet, awaiting the wouldbe intruders next move. after a time the cautious rattling ceased, and i heard the room to the north entered with a pass key. then the lock of the connecting door to my room was softly tried. the bolt held, of course, and i heard the floor creak as the prowler left the room. after a moment there came another soft rattling, and i knew that the room to the south of me was being entered. again a furtive trying of a bolted connecting door, and again a receding creaking. this time the creaking went along the hall and down the stairs, so i knew that the prowler had realised the bolted condition of my doors and was giving up his attempt for a greater or lesser time, as the future would shew. the readiness with which i fell into a plan of action proves that i must have been subconsciously fearing some menace and considering possible avenues of escape for hours. from the first i felt that the unseen fumbler meant a danger not to be met or dealt with, but only to be fled from as precipitately as possible. the one thing to do was to get out of that hotel alive as quickly as i could, and through some channel other than the front stairs and lobby. rising softly and throwing my flashlight on the switch, i sought to light the bulb over my bed in order to choose and pocket some belongings for a swift, valiseless flight. nothing, however, happened; and i saw that the power had been cut off. clearly, some cryptic, evil movement was afoot on a large scale just what, i could not say. as i stood pondering with my hand on the now useless switch i heard a muffled creaking on the floor below, and thought i could barely distinguish voices in conversation. a moment later i felt less sure that the deeper sounds were voices, since the apparent hoarse barkings and loosesyllabled croakings bore so little resemblance to recognized human speech. then i thought with renewed force of what the factory inspector had heard in the night in this mouldering and pestilential building. having filled my pockets with the flashlights aid, i put on my hat and tiptoed to the windows to consider chances of descent. despite the states safety regulations there was no fire escape on this side of the hotel, and i saw that my windows commanded only a sheer three story drop to the cobbled courtyard. on the right and left, however, some ancient brick business blocks abutted on the hotel; their slant roofs coming up to a reasonable jumping distance from my fourthstory level. to reach either of these lines of buildings i would have to be in a room two from my own in one case on the north and in the other case on the south and my mind instantly set to work what chances i had of making the transfer. i could not, i decided, risk an emergence into the corridor; where my footsteps would surely be heard, and where the difficulties of entering the desired room would be insuperable. my progress, if it was to be made at all, would have to be through the less solidlybuilt connecting doors of the rooms; the locks and bolts of which i would have to force violently, using my shoulder as a batteringram whenever they were set against me. this, i thought, would be possible owing to the rickety nature of the house and its fixtures; but i realised i could not do it noiselessly. i would have to count on sheer speed, and the chance of getting to a window before any hostile forces became coordinated enough to open the right door toward me with a passkey. my own outer door i reinforced by pushing the bureau against it little by little, in order to make a minimum of sound. i perceived that my chances were very slender, and was fully prepared for any calamity. even getting to another roof would not solve the problem for there would then remain the task of reaching the ground and escaping from the town. one thing in my favour was the deserted and ruinous state of the abutting building and the number of skylights gaping blackly open in each row. gathering from the grocery boys map that the best route out of town was southward, i glanced first at the connecting door on the south side of the room. it was designed to open in my direction, hence i saw after drawing the bolt and finding other fastening in place it was not a favorable one for forcing. accordingly abandoning it as a route, i cautiously moved the bedstead against it to hamper any attack which might be made on it later from the next room. the door on the north was hung to open away from me, and this though a test proved it to be locked or bolted from the other side i knew must be my route. if i could gain the roofs of the buildings in paine street and descend successfully to the ground level, i might perhaps dart through the courtyard and the adjacent or opposite building to washington or bates or else emerge in paine and edge around southward into washington. in any case, i would aim to strike washington somehow and get quickly out of the town square region. my preference would be to avoid paine, since the fire station there might be open all night. as i thought of these things i looked out over the squalid sea of decaying roofs below me, now brightened by the beams of a moon not much past full. on the right the black gash of the rivergorge clove the panorama; abandoned factories and railway station clinging barnaclelike to its sides. beyond it the rusted railway and the rowley road led off through a flat marshy terrain dotted with islets of higher and dryer scrubgrown land. on the left the creekthreaded countryside was nearer, the narrow road to ipswich gleaming white in the moonlight. i could not see from my side of the hotel the southward route toward arkham which i had determined to take. i was irresolutely speculating on when i had better attack the northward door, and on how i could least audibly manage it, when i noticed that the vague noises underfoot had given place to a fresh and heavier creaking of the stairs. a wavering flicker of light shewed through my transom, and the boards of the corridor began to groan with a ponderous load. muffled sounds of possible vocal origin approached, and at length a firm knock came at my outer door. for a moment i simply held my breath and waited. eternities seemed to elapse, and the nauseous fishy odour of my environment seemed to mount suddenly and spectacularly. then the knocking was repeated continuously, and with growing insistence. i knew that the time for action had come, and forthwith drew the bolt of the northward connecting door, bracing myself for the task of battering it open. the knocking waxed louder, and i hoped that its volume would cover the sound of my efforts. at last beginning my attempt, i lunged again and again at the thin paneling with my left shoulder, heedless of shock or pain. the door resisted even more than i expected, but i did not give in. and all the while the clamour at the outer door increased. finally the connecting door gave, but with such a crash that i knew those outside must have heard. instantly the outside knocking became a violent battering, while keys sounded ominously in the hall doors of the rooms on both sides of me. rushing through the newly opened connexion, i succeeded in bolting the northerly hall door before the lock could he turned; but even as i did so i heard the hall door of the third room the one from whose window i had hoped to reach the roof below being tried with a pass key. for an instant i felt absolute despair, since my trapping in a chamber with no window egress seemed complete. a wave of almost abnormal horror swept over me, and invested with a terrible but unexplainable singularity the flashlightglimpsed dust prints made by the intruder who had lately tried my door from this room. then, with a dazed automatism which persisted despite hopelessness, i made for the next connecting door and performed the blind motion of pushing at it in an effort to get through and granting that fastenings might be as providentially intact as in this second room bolt the hall door beyond before the lock could be turned from outside. sheer fortunate chance gave me my reprieve for the connecting door before me was not only unlocked but actually ajar. in a second i was though, and had my right knee and shoulder against a hall door which was visibly opening inward. my pressure took the opener off guard, for the thing shut as i pushed, so that i could slip the wellconditioned bolt as i had done with the other door. as i gained this respite i heard the battering at the two other doors abate, while a confused clatter came from the connecting door i had shielded with the bedstead. evidently the bulk of my assailants had entered the southerly room and were massing in a lateral attack. but at the same moment a pass key sounded in the next door to the north, and i knew that a nearer peril was at hand. the northward connecting door was wide open, but there was no time to think about checking the already turning lock in the hall. all i could do was to shut and bolt the open connecting door, as well as its mate on the opposite side pushing a bedstead against the one and a bureau against the other, and moving a washstand in front of the hall door. i must, i saw, trust to such makeshift barriers to shield me till i could get out the window and on the roof of the paine street block. but even in this acute moment my chief horror was something apart from the immediate weakness of my defenses. i was shuddering because not one of my pursuers, despite some hideous panting, grunting, and subdued barkings at odd intervals, was uttering an unmuffled or intelligible vocal sound. as i moved the furniture and rushed toward the windows i heard a frightful scurrying along the corridor toward the room north of me, and perceived that the southward battering had ceased. plainly, most of my opponents were about to concentrate against the feeble connecting door which they knew must open directly on me. outside, the moon played on the ridgepole of the block below, and i saw that the jump would be desperately hazardous because of the steep surface on which i must land. surveying the conditions, i chose the more southerly of the two windows as my avenue of escape; planning to land on the inner slope of the roof and make for the nearest skylight. once inside one of the decrepit brick structures i would have to reckon with pursuit; but i hoped to descend and dodge in and out of yawning doorways along the shadowed courtyard, eventually getting to washington street and slipping out of town toward the south. the clatter at the northerly connecting door was now terrific, and i saw that the weak panelling was beginning to splinter. obviously, the besiegers had brought some ponderous object into play as a batteringram. the bedstead, however, still held firm; so that i had at least a faint chance of making good my escape. as i opened the window i noticed that it was flanked by heavy velour draperies suspended from a pole by brass rings, and also that there was a large projecting catch for the shutters on the exterior. seeing a possible means of avoiding the dangerous jump, i yanked at the hangings and brought them down, pole and all; then quickly hooking two of the rings in the shutter catch and flinging the drapery outside. the heavy folds reached fully to the abutting roof, and i saw that the rings and catch would be likely to bear my weight. so, climbing out of the window and down the improvised rope ladder, i left behind me forever the morbid and horrorinfested fabric of the gilman house. i landed safely on the loose slates of the steep roof, and succeeded in gaining the gaping black skylight without a slip. glancing up at the window i had left, i observed it was still dark, though far across the crumbling chimneys to the north i could see lights ominously blazing in the order of dagon hall, the baptist church, and the congregational church which i recalled so shiveringly. there had seemed to be no one in the courtyard below, and i hoped there would be a chance to get away before the spreading of a general alarm. flashing my pocket lamp into the skylight, i saw that there were no steps down. the distance was slight, however, so i clambered over the brink and dropped; striking a dusty floor littered with crumbling boxes and barrels. the moonbeams did not reach down here, but i could just see my way about without using the flashlight. some of the windows on the gilman house side were faintly glowing, and i thought i heard confused sounds within. walking softly over to the washington street side i perceived several open doorways, and chose the nearest as my route out. the hallway inside was black, and when i reached the opposite end i saw that the street door was wedged immovably shut. resolved to try another building, i groped my way back toward the courtyard, but stopped short when close to the doorway. for out of an opened door in the gilman house a large crowd of doubtful shapes was pouring lanterns bobbing in the darkness, and horrible croaking voices exchanging low cries in what was certainly not english. the figures moved uncertainly, and i realized to my relief that they did not know where i had gone; but for all that they sent a shiver of horror through my frame. their features were indistinguishable, but their crouching, shambling gait was abominably repellent. and worst of all, i perceived that one figure was strangely robed, and unmistakably surmounted by a tall tiara of a design altogether too familiar. as the figures spread throughout the courtyard, i felt my fears increase. suppose i could find no egress from this building on the street side? the fishy odour was detestable, and i wondered i could stand it without fainting. again groping toward the street, i opened a door off the hall and came upon an empty room with closely shuttered but sashless windows. fumbling in the rays of my flashlight, i found i could open the shutters; and in another moment had climbed outside and was fully closing the aperture in its original manner. i was now in washington street, and for the moment saw no living thing nor any light save that of the moon. from several directions in the distance, however, i could hear the sound of hoarse voices, of footsteps, and of a curious kind of pattering which did not sound quite like footsteps. plainly i had no time to lose. the points of the compass were clear to me, and i was glad that all the street lights were turned off, as is often the custom on strongly moonlit nights in prosperous rural regions. some of the sounds came from the south, yet i retained my design of escaping in that direction. there would, i knew, be plenty of deserted doorways to shelter me in case i met any person or group who looked like pursuers. i walked rapidly, softly, and close to the ruined houses. while hatless and dishevelled after my arduous climb, i did not look especially noticeable; and stood a good chance of passing unheeded if forced to encounter any casual wayfarer. at bates street i drew into a yawning vestibule while two shambling figures crossed in front of me, but was soon on my way again and approaching the open space where eliot street obliquely crosses washington at the intersection of south. though i had never seen this space, it had looked dangerous to me on the grocery youths map; since the moonlight would have free play there. there was no use trying to evade it, for any alternative course would involve detours of possibly disastrous visibility and delaying effect. the only thing to do was to cross it boldly and openly; imitating the typical shamble of the innsmouth folk as best i could, and trusting that no one or at least no pursuer of mine would be there. just how fully the pursuit was organised and indeed, just what its purpose might be i could form no idea. there seemed to be unusual activity in the town, but i judged that the news of my escape from the gilman had not yet spread. i would, of course, soon have to shift from washington to some other southward street; for that party from the hotel would doubtless be after me. i must have left dust prints in that last old building, revealing how i had gained the street. the open space was, as i had expected, strongly moonlit; and i saw the remains of a parklike, ironrailed green in its center. fortunately no one was about though a curious sort of buzz or roar seemed to be increasing in the direction of town square. south street was very wide, leading directly down a slight declivity to the waterfront and commanding a long view out a sea; and i hoped that no one would be glancing up it from afar as i crossed in the bright moonlight. my progress was unimpeded, and no fresh sound arose to hint that i had been spied. glancing about me, i involuntarily let my pace slacken for a second to take in the sight of the sea, gorgeous in the burning moonlight at the streets end. far out beyond the breakwater was the dim, dark line of devil reef, and as i glimpsed it i could not help thinking of all the hideous legends i had heard in the last twentyfour hours legends which portrayed this ragged rock as a veritable gateway to realms of unfathomed horror and inconceivable abnormality. then, without warning, i saw the intermittent flashes of light on the distant reef. they were definite and unmistakable, and awaked in my mind a blind horror beyond all rational proportion. my muscles tightened for panic flight, held in only by a certain unconscious caution and halfhypnotic fascination. and to make matters worse, there now flashed forth from the lofty cupola of the gilman house, which loomed up to the northeast behind me, a series of analogous though differently spaced gleams which could be nothing less than an answering signal. controlling my muscles, and realising afresh how plainly visible i was, i resumed my brisker and feignedly shambling pace; though keeping my eyes on that hellish and ominous reef as long as the opening of south street gave me a seaward view. what the whole proceeding meant, i could not imagine; unless it involved some strange rite connected with devil reef, or unless some party had landed from a ship on that sinister rock. i now bent to the left around the ruinous green; still gazing toward the ocean as it blazed in the spectral summer moonlight, and watching the cryptical flashing of those nameless, unexplainable beacons. it was then that the most horrible impression of all was borne in upon me the impression which destroyed my last vestige of selfcontrol and sent me running frantically southward past the yawning black doorways and fishily staring windows of that deserted nightmare street. for at a closer glance i saw that the moonlit waters between the reef and the shore were far from empty. they were alive with a teeming horde of shapes swimming inward toward the town; and even at my vast distance and in my single moment of perception i could tell that the bobbing heads and flailing arms were alien and aberrant in a way scarcely to be expressed or consciously formulated. my frantic running ceased before i had covered a block, for at my left i began to hear something like the hue and cry of organised pursuit. there were footsteps and gutteral sounds, and a rattling motor wheezed south along federal street. in a second all my plans were utterly changed for if the southward highway were blocked ahead of me, i must clearly find another egress from innsmouth. i paused and drew into a gaping doorway, reflecting how lucky i was to have left the moonlit open space before these pursuers came down the parallel street. a second reflection was less comforting. since the pursuit was down another street, it was plain that the party was not following me directly. it had not seen me, but was simply obeying a general plan of cutting off my escape. this, however, implied that all roads leading out of innsmouth were similarly patrolled; for the people could not have known what route i intended to take. if this were so, i would have to make my retreat across country away from any road; but how could i do that in view of the marshy and creekriddled nature of all the surrounding region? for a moment my brain reeled both from sheer hopelessness and from a rapid increase in the omnipresent fishy odour. then i thought of the abandoned railway to rowley, whose solid line of ballasted, weedgrown earth still stretched off to the northwest from the crumbling station on the edge at the rivergorge. there was just a chance that the townsfolk would not think of that; since its briarchoked desertion made it halfimpassable, and the unlikeliest of all avenues for a fugitive to choose. i had seen it clearly from my hotel window and knew about how it lay. most of its earlier length was uncomfortably visible from the rowley road, and from high places in the town itself; but one could perhaps crawl inconspicuously through the undergrowth. at any rate, it would form my only chance of deliverance, and there was nothing to do but try it. drawing inside the hall of my deserted shelter, i once more consulted the grocery boys map with the aid of the flashlight. the immediate problem was how to reach the ancient railway; and i now saw that the safest course was ahead to babson street; then west to lafayette there edging around but not crossing an open space homologous to the one i had traversed and subsequently back northward and westward in a zigzagging line through lafayette, bates, adam, and bank streets the latter skirting the river gorge to the abandoned and dilapidated station i had seen from my window. my reason for going ahead to babson was that i wished neither to recross the earlier open space nor to begin my westward course along a cross street as broad as south. starting once more, i crossed the street to the righthand side in order to edge around into babeon as inconspicuously as possible. noises still continued in federal street, and as i glanced behind me i thought i saw a gleam of light near the building through which i had escaped. anxious to leave washington street, i broke into a quiet dogtrot, trusting to luck not to encounter any observing eye. next the corner of babson street i saw to my alarm that one of the houses was still inhabited, as attested by curtains at the window; but there were no lights within, and i passed it without disaster. in babson street, which crossed federal and might thus reveal me to the searchers, i clung as closely as possible to the sagging, uneven buildings; twice pausing in a doorway as the noises behind me momentarily increased. the open space ahead shone wide and desolate under the moon, but my route would not force me to cross it. during my second pause i began to detect a fresh distribution of vague sounds; and upon looking cautiously out from cover beheld a motor car darting across the open space, bound outward along eliot street, which there intersects both babson and lafayette. as i watched choked by a sudden rise in the fishy odour after a short abatement i saw a band of uncouth, crouching shapes loping and shambling in the same direction; and knew that this must be the party guarding the ipswich road, since that highway forms an extension of eliot street. two of the figures i glimpsed were in voluminous robes, and one wore a peaked diadem which glistened whitely in the moonlight. the gait of this figure was so odd that it sent a chill through me for it seemed to me the creature was almost hopping. when the last of the band was out of sight i resumed my progress; darting around the corner into lafayette street, and crossing eliot very hurriedly lest stragglers of the party be still advancing along that thoroughfare. i did hear some croaking and clattering sounds far off toward town square, but accomplished the passage without disaster. my greatest dread was in recrossing broad and moonlit south street with its seaward view and i had to nerve myself for the ordeal. someone might easily be looking, and possible eliot street stragglers could not fail to glimpse me from either of two points. at the last moment i decided i had better slacken my trot and make the crossing as before in the shambling gait of an average innsmouth native. when the view of the water again opened out this time on my right i was halfdetermined not to look at it at all. i could not however, resist; but cast a sidelong glance as i carefully and imitatively shambled toward the protecting shadows ahead. there was no ship visible, as i had halfexpected there would be. instead, the first thing which caught my eye was a small rowboat pulling in toward the abandoned wharves and laden with some bulky, tarpaulincovered object. its rowers, though distantly and indistinctly seen, were of an especially repellent aspect. several swimmers were still discernible; while on the far black reef i could see a faint, steady glow unlike the winking beacon visible before, and of a curious colour which i could not precisely identify. above the slant roofs ahead and to the right there loomed the tall cupola of the gilman house, but it was completely dark. the fishy odour, dispelled for a moment by some merciful breeze, now closed in again with maddening intensity. i had not quite crossed the street when i heard a muttering band advancing along washington from the north. as they reached the broad open space where i had had my first disquieting glimpse of the moonlit water i could see them plainly only a block away and was horrified by the bestial abnormality of their faces and the doglike subhumanness of their crouching gait. one man moved in a positively simian way, with long arms frequently touching the ground; while another figure robed and tiaraed seemed to progress in an almost hopping fashion. i judged this party to be the one i had seen in the gilmans courtyard the one, therefore, most closely on my trail. as some of the figures turned to look in my direction i was transfixed with fright, yet managed to preserve the casual, shambling gait i had assumed. to this day i do not know whether they saw me or not. if they did, my stratagem must have deceived them, for they passed on across the moonlit space without varying their course meanwhile croaking and jabbering in some hateful guttural patois i could not identify. once more in shadow, i resumed my former dogtrot past the leaning and decrepit houses that stared blankly into the night. having crossed to the western sidewalk i rounded the nearest corner into bates street where i kept close to the buildings on the southern side. i passed two houses shewing signs of habitation, one of which had faint lights in upper rooms, yet met with no obstacle. as i tuned into adams street i felt measurably safer, but received a shook when a man reeled out of a black doorway directly in front of me. he proved, however, too hopelessly drunk to be a menace; so that i reached the dismal ruins of the bank street warehouses in safety. no one was stirring in that dead street beside the rivergorge, and the roar of the waterfalls quite drowned my foot steps. it was a long dogtrot to the ruined station, and the great brick warehouse walls around me seemed somehow more terrifying than the fronts of private houses. at last i saw the ancient arcaded station or what was left of it and made directly for the tracks that started from its farther end. the rails were rusty but mainly intact, and not more than half the ties had rotted away. walking or running on such a surface was very difficult; but i did my best, and on the whole made very fair time. for some distance the line kept on along the gorges brink, but at length i reached the long covered bridge where it crossed the chasm at a dizzying height. the condition of this bridge would determine my next step. if humanly possible, i would use it; if not, l would have to risk more street wandering and take the nearest intact highway bridge. the vast, barnlike length of the old bridge gleamed spectrally in the moonlight, and i saw that the ties were safe for at least a few feet within. entering, i began to use my flashlight, and was almost knocked down by the cloud of bats that flapped past me. about halfway across there was a perilous gap in the ties which i feared for a moment would halt me; but in the end i risked a desperate jump which fortunately succeeded. i was glad to see the moonlight again when i emerged from that macabre tunnel. the old tracks crossed river street at grade, and at once veered off into a region increasingly rural and with less and less of innsmouths abhorrent fishy odour. here the dense growth of weeds and briers hindered me and cruelly tore at my clothes, but i was none the less glad that they were there to give me concealment in case of peril. i knew that much of my route must be visible from the rowley road. the marshy region began very abruptly, with the single track on a low, grassy embankment where the weedy growth was somewhat thinner. then came a sort of island of higher ground, where the line passed through a shallow open cut choked with bushes and brambles. i was very glad of this partial shelter, since at this point the rowley road was uncomfortably near according to my window view. at the end of the cut it would cross the track and swerve off to a safer distance; but meanwhile i must be exceedingly careful. i was by this time thankfully certain that the railway itself was not patrolled. just before entering the cut i glanced behind me, but saw no pursuer. the ancient spires and roofs of decaying innsmouth gleamed lovely and ethereal in the magic yellow moonlight, and i thought of how they must have looked in the old days before the shadow fell. then, as my gaze circled inland from the town, something less tranquil arrested my notice and held me immobile for a second. what i saw or fancied i saw was a disturbing suggestion of undulant motion far to the south; a suggestion which made me conclude that a very large horde must be pouring out of the city along the level ipswich road. the distance was great and i could distinguish nothing in detail; but i did not at all like the look of that moving column. it undulated too much, and glistened too brightly in the rays of the now westering moon. there was a suggestion of sound, too, though the wind was blowing the other way a suggestion of bestial scraping and bellowing even worse than the muttering of the parties i had lately overheard. all sorts of unpleasant conjectures crossed my mind. i thought of those very extreme innsmouth types said to be hidden in crumbling, centuried warrens near the waterfront; i thought, too, of those nameless swimmers i had seen. counting the parties so far glimpsed, as well as those presumably covering other roads, the number of my pursuers must be strangely large for a town as depopulated as innsmouth. whence could come the dense personnel of such a column as i now beheld? did those ancient, unplumbed warrens teem with a twisted, uncatalogued, and unsuspected life? or had some unseen ship indeed landed a legion of unknown outsiders on that hellish reef? who were they? why were they here? and if such a column of them was scouring the ipswich road, would the patrols on the other roads be likewise augmented? i had entered the brushgrown cut and was struggling along at a very slow pace when that damnable fishy odour again waxed dominant. had the wind suddenly changed eastward, so that it blew in from the sea and over the town? it must have, i concluded, since i now began to hear shocking guttural murmurs from that hitherto silent direction. there was another sound, too a kind of wholesale, colossal flopping or pattering which somehow called up images of the most detestable sort. it made me think illogically of that unpleasantly undulating column on the faroff ipswich road. and then both stench and sounds grew stronger, so that i paused shivering and grateful for the cuts protection. it was here, i recalled, that the rowley road drew so close to the old railway before crossing westward and diverging. something was coming along that road, and i must lie low till its passage and vanishment in the distance. thank heaven these creatures employed no dogs for tracking though perhaps that would have been impossible amidst the omnipresent regional odour. crouched in the bushes of that sandy cleft i felt reasonably safe, even though i knew the searchers would have to cross the track in front of me not much more than a hundred yards away. i would be able to see them, but they could not, except by a malign miracle, see me. all at once i began dreading to look at them as they passed. i saw the close moonlit space where they would surge by, and had curious thoughts about the irredeemable pollution of that space. they would perhaps be the worst of all innsmouth types something one would not care to remember. the stench waxed overpowering, and the noises swelled to a bestial babel of croaking, baying and barking without the least suggestion of human speech. were these indeed the voices of my pursuers? did they have dogs after all? so far i had seen none of the lower animals in innsmouth. that flopping or pattering was monstrous i could not look upon the degenerate creatures responsible for it. i would keep my eyes shut till the sound receded toward the west. the horde was very close now air foul with their hoarse snarlings, and the ground almost shaking with their alienrhythmed footfalls. my breath nearly ceased to come, and i put every ounce of willpower into the task of holding my eyelids down. i am not even yet willing to say whether what followed was a hideous actuality or only a nightmare hallucination. the later action of the government, after my frantic appeals, would tend to confirm it as a monstrous truth; but could not an hallucination have been repeated under the quasihypnotic spell of that ancient, haunted, and shadowed town? such places have strange properties, and the legacy of insane legend might well have acted on more than one human imagination amidst those dead, stenchcursed streets and huddles of rotting roofs and crumbling steeples. is it not possible that the germ of an actual contagious madness lurks in the depths of that shadow over innsmouth? who can be sure of reality after hearing things like the tale of old zadok allen? the government men never found poor zadok, and have no conjectures to make as to what became of him. where does madness leave off and reality begin? is it possible that even my latest fear is sheer delusion? but i must try to tell what i thought i saw that night under the mocking yellow moon saw surging and hopping down the rowley road in plain sight in front of me as i crouched among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut. of course my resolution to keep my eyes shut had failed. it was foredoomed to failure for who could crouch blindly while a legion of croaking, baying entities of unknown source flopped noisomely past, scarcely more than a hundred yards away? i thought i was prepared for the worst, and i really ought to have been prepared considering what i had seen before. my other pursuers had been accursedly abnormal so should i not have been ready to face a strengthening of the abnormal element; to look upon forms in which there was no mixture of the normal at all? i did not open my eyes until the raucous clamour came loudly from a point obviously straight ahead. then i knew that a long section of them must be plainly in sight where the sides of the cut flattened out and the road crossed the track and i could no longer keep myself from sampling whatever honor that leering yellow moon might have to shew. it was the end, for whatever remains to me of life on the surface of this earth, of every vestige of mental peace and confidence in the integrity of nature and of the human mind. nothing that i could have imagined nothing, even, that i could have gathered had i credited old zadoks crazy tale in the most literal way would be in any way comparable to the demoniac, blasphemous reality that i saw or believe i saw. i have tied to hint what it was in order to postpone the horror of writing it down baldly. can it be possible that this planet has actually spawned such things; that human eyes have truly seen, as objective flesh, what man has hitherto known only in febrile phantasy and tenuous legend? and yet i saw them in a limitless stream flopping, hopping, croaking, bleating urging inhumanly through the spectral moonlight in a grotesque, malignant saraband of fantastic nightmare. and some of them had tall tiaras of that nameless whitishgold metal ... and some were strangely robed ... and one, who led the way, was clad in a ghoulishly humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a mans felt hat perched on the shapeless thing that answered for a head. i think their predominant colour was a greyishgreen, though they had white bellies. they were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were scaly. their forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads of fish, with prodigious bulging eyes that never closed. at the sides of their necks were palpitating gills, and their long paws were webbed. they hopped irregularly, sometimes on two legs and sometimes on four. i was somehow glad that they had no more than four limbs. their croaking, baying voices, clearly wed tar articulate speech, held all the dark shades of expression which their staring faces lacked. but for all of their monstrousness they were not unfamiliar to me. i knew too well what they must be for was not the memory of the evil tiara at newburyport still fresh? they were the blasphemous fishfrogs of the nameless design living and horrible and as i saw them i knew also of what that humped, tiaraed priest in the black church basement had fearsomely reminded me. their number was past guessing. it seemed to me that there were limitless swarms of them and certainly my momentary glimpse could have shewn only the least fraction. in another instant everything was blotted out by a merciful fit of fainting; the first i had ever had. v it was a gentle daylight rain that awaked me front my stupor in the brushgrown railway cut, and when i staggered out to the roadway ahead i saw no trace of any prints in the fresh mud. the fishy odour, too, was gone, innsmouths ruined roofs and toppling steeples loomed up greyly toward the southeast, but not a living creature did i spy in all the desolate salt marshes around. my watch was still going, and told me that the hour was past noon. the reality of what i had been through was highly uncertain in my mind, but i felt that something hideous lay in the background. i must get away from evilshadowed innsmouth and accordingly i began to test my cramped, wearied powers of locomotion. despite weakness hunger, horror, and bewilderment i found myself after a time able to walk; so started slowly along the muddy road to rowley. before evening i was in village, getting a meal and providing myself with presentable cloths. i caught the night train to arkham, and the next day talked long and earnestly with government officials there; a process i later repeated in boston. with the main result of these colloquies the public is now familiar and i wish, for normalitys sake, there were nothing more to tell. perhaps it is madness that is overtaking me yet perhaps a greater horror or a greater marvel is reaching out. it seemed that a material uncle of mine had been there many years before on a quest much like my own; and that my grandmothers family was a topic of some local curiosity. there had, mr. peabody said, been considerable discussion about the marriage of her father, benjamin orne, just after the civil war; since the ancestry of the bride was peculiarly puzzling. that bride was understood to have been an orphaned marsh of new hampshire a cousin of the essex county marshes but her education had been in france and she knew very little of her family. a guardian had deposited funds in a boston bank to maintain her and her french governess; but that guardians name was unfamiliar to arkham people, and in time he dropped out of sight, so that the governess assumed the role by court appointment. the frenchwoman now long dead was very taciturn, and there were those who said she would have told more than she did. but the most baffling thing was the inability of anyone to place the recorded parents of the young woman enoch and lydia (meserve) marsh among the known families of new hampshire. possibly, many suggested, she was the natural daughter of some marsh of prominence she certainly had the true marsh eyes. most of the puzzling was done after her early death, which took place at the birth of my grandmother her only child. having formed some disagreeable impressions connected with the name of marsh, i did not welcome the news that it belonged on my own ancestral tree; nor was i pleased by mr. peabodys suggestion that i had the true marsh eyes myself. however, i was grateful for data which i knew would prove valuable; and took copious notes and lists of book references regarding the welldocumented orne family. i went directly home to toledo from boston, and later spent a month at maumee recuperating from my ordeal. in september i entered oberlin for my final year, and from then till the next june was busy with studies and other wholesome activities reminded of the bygone terror only by occasional official visits from government men in connexion with the campaign which my pleas and evidence had started. around the middle of july just a year after the innsmouth experience i spent a week with my late mothers family in cleveland; checking some of my new genealogical data with the various notes, traditions, and bits of heirloom material in existence there, and seeing what kind of a connected chart i could construct. i did not exactly relish this task, for the atmosphere of the williamson home had always depressed me. there was a strain of morbidity there, and my mother had never encouraged my visiting her parents as a child, although she always welcomed her father when he came to toledo. my arkhamborn grandmother had seemed strange and almost terrifying to me, and i do not think i grieved when she disappeared. i was eight years old then, and it was said that she had wandered off in grief after the suicide of my uncle douglas, her eldest son. he had shot himself after a trip to new england the same trip, no doubt, which had caused him to be recalled at the arkham historical society. this uncle had resembled her, and i had never liked him either. something about the staring, unwinking expression of both of them had given me a vague, unaccountable uneasiness. my mother and uncle walter had not looked like that. they were like their father, though poor little cousin lawrence walters son had been almost perfect duplicate of his grandmother before his condition took him to the permanent seclusion of a sanitarium at canton. i had not seen him in four years, but my uncle once implied that his state, both mental and physical, was very bad. this worry had probably been a major cause of his mothers death two years before. my grandfather and his widowed son walter now comprised the cleveland household, but the memory of older times hung thickly over it. i still disliked the place, and tried to get my researches done as quickly as possible. williamson records and traditions were supplied in abundance by my grandfather; though for orne material i had to depend on my uncle walter, who put at my disposal the contents of all his files, including notes, letters, cuttings, heirlooms, photographs, and miniatures. it was in going over the letters and pictures on the orne side that i began to acquire a kind of terror of my own ancestry. as i have said, my grandmother and uncle douglas had always disturbed me. now, years after their passing, i gazed at their pictured faces with a measurably heightened feeling of repulsion and alienation. i could not at first understand the change, but gradually a horrible sort of comparison began to obtrude itself on my unconscious mind despite the steady refusal of my consciousness to admit even the least suspicion of it. it was clear that the typical expression of these faces now suggested something it had not suggested before something which would bring stark panic if too openly thought of. but the worst shock came when my uncle shewed me the orne jewellery in a downtown safe deposit vault. some of the items were delicate and inspiring enough, but there was one box of strange old pieces descended from my mysterious greatgrandmother which my uncle was almost reluctant to produce. they were, he said, of very grotesque and almost repulsive design, and had never to his knowledge been publicly worn; though my grandmother used to enjoy looking at them. vague legends of bad luck clustered around them, and my greatgrandmothers french governess had said they ought not to be worn in new england, though it would be quite safe to wear them in europe. as my uncle began slowly and grudgingly to unwrap the things he urged me not to be shocked by the strangeness and frequent hideousness of the designs. artists and archaeologists who had seen them pronounced their workmanship superlatively and exotically exquisite, though no one seemed able to define their exact material or assign them to any specific art tradition. there were two armlets, a tiara, and a kind of pectoral; the latter having in high relief certain figures of almost unbearable extravagance. during this description i had kept a tight rein on my emotions, but my face must have betrayed my mounting fears. my uncle looked concerned, and paused in his unwrapping to study my countenance. i motioned to him to continue, which he did with renewed signs of reluctance. he seemed to expect some demonstration when the first piece the tiara became visible, but i doubt if he expected quite what actually happened. i did not expect it, either, for i thought i was thoroughly forewarned regarding what the jewellery would turn out to be. what i did was to faint silently away, just as i had done in that brier choked railway cut a year before. from that day on my life has been a nightmare of brooding and apprehension nor do i know how much is hideous truth and how much madness. my greatgrandmother had been a marsh of unknown source whose husband lived in arkham and did not old zadok say that the daughter of obed marsh by a monstrous mother was married to an arkham man trough trick? what was it the ancient toper had muttered about the line of my eyes to captain obeds? in arkham, too, the curator had told me i had the true marsh eyes. was obed marsh my own greatgreatgrandfather? who or what then, was my greatgreatgrandmother? but perhaps this was all madness. those whitishgold ornaments might easily have been bought from some innsmouth sailor by the father of my greatgrandmother, whoever he was. and that look in the staringeyed faces of my grandmother and selfslain uncle might be sheer fancy on my part sheer fancy, bolstered up by the innsmouth shadow which had so darkly coloured my imagination. but why had my uncle killed himself after an ancestral quest in new england? there was much more than i could remember, but even what i did remember each morning would be enough to stamp me as a madman or a genius if ever i dared write it down. some frightful influence, i felt, was seeking gradually to drag me out of the sane world of wholesome life into unnamable abysses of blackness and alienage; and the process told heavily on me. my health and appearance grew steadily worse, till finally i was forced to give up my position and adopt the static, secluded life of an invalid. some odd nervous affliction had me in its grip, and i found myself at times almost unable to shut my eyes. it was then that i began to study the mirror with mounting alarm. the slow ravages of disease are not pleasant to watch, but in my case there was something subtler and more puzzling in the background. my father seemed to notice it, too, for he began looking at me curiously and almost affrightedly. what was taking place in me? could it be that i was coming to resemble my grandmother and uncle douglas? one night i had a frightful dream in which i met my grandmother under the sea. she lived in a phosphorescent palace of many terraces, with gardens of strange leprous corals and grotesque brachiate efflorescences, and welcomed me with a warmth that may have been sardonic. she had changed as those who take to the water change and told me she had never died. instead, she had gone to a spot her dead son had learned about, and had leaped to a realm whose wonders destined for him as well he had spurned with a smoking pistol. this was to be my realm, too i could not escape it. i would never die, but would live with those who had lived since before man ever walked the earth. i met also that which had been her grandmother. for eighty thousand years pththyalyi had lived in yhanthlei, and thither she had gone back after obed marsh was dead. yhanthlei was not destroyed when the upperearth men shot death into the sea. it was hurt, but not destroyed. the deep ones could never be destroyed, even though the palaeogean magic of the forgotten old ones might sometimes check them. for the present they would rest; but some day, if they remembered, they would rise again for the tribute great cthulhu craved. it would be a city greater than innsmouth next time. they had planned to spread, and had brought up that which would help them, but now they must wait once more. for bringing the upperearth mens death i must do a penance, but that would not be heavy. this was the dream in which i saw a shoggoth for the first time, and the sight set me awake in a frenzy of screaming. that morning the mirror definitely told me i had acquired the innsmouth look. so far i have not shot myself as my uncle douglas did. i bought an automatic and almost took the step, but certain dreams deterred me. the tense extremes of horror are lessening, and i feel queerly drawn toward the unknown seadeeps instead of fearing them. i hear and do strange things in sleep, and awake with a kind of exaltation instead of terror. i do not believe i need to wait for the full change as most have waited. if i did, my father would probably shut me up in a sanitarium as my poor little cousin is shut up. stupendous and unheardof splendors await me below, and i shall seek them soon. iarlyehl cihuiha flgagnl id ia! no, i shall not shoot myself i cannot be made to shoot myself! i shall plan my cousins escape from that canton madhouse, and together we shall go to marvelshadowed innsmouth. we shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea and dive down through black abysses to cyclopean and manycolumned yhanthlei, and in that lair of the deep ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory for ever. 